

THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC 
LITURGY 














THE LITURGY 


ACCORDING TO THE USE OF 


Che Liberal Catholic Church 
Ze 


/ re 

es | 

Jé 7 : eS 
PREPARED FOR THE USE OF 


ENGLISH-SPEAKING CONGREGATIONS 


Publishers 
THE ST. ALBAN PRESS 
London 


Los Angeles Sydney 


This Liturgy is authorized for use in the 
Liberal Catholic Church. 


yh CHARLES WEBSTER LEADBEATER 


Presiding Bishop. 


The Feast of the Epiphany, 1924. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


The Liberal Catholic Church—General Infor- 
mation RRM Te ee 5.5)" = at (ley 
Preface 
A Table of all tha Penats aad Holy Daye" 
A Table of the Sundays throughout the Year 
Rules Governing the Precedence of Feasts and 
Holy Days 
Rules to know when Movable roast Cetus 
A Table of the Movable Feasts 
Notes and Directions 
The Collects, Epistles and Gospels io Be "aed 
throughout the Year 
The Proper Graduals and Prefaces of the Sen 
Oreeds and Acts of Faith 
The Celebration of the Holy oh avist. 
The Liturgy of the Holy Eucharist .. 
Asperges Sees pacientes 
The Holy Bucharist 
A Shorter Form for the Celebration “of the 
Holy Eucharist 
Form for the Administration of Holy Obmmution 
Vespers 
Benediction of the Most ‘Holy Bactament 
Prime 
Complin 
Holy Baptism 
Form to be used oe Taforite 
Form to be used for Children 
Form to be used for Adults 
Confirmation 
Holy Matrimony ao. 
The Marriage Service 
The Nuptial Eucharist 
Confession and Absolution 
A Service of Healing 
Holy Unction and Communion ‘of thd ‘Sick 
Procedure ‘‘In. Extremis’’ 
The Burial of the Dead .. 
The Burial ; 
The Requiem Bachavict 
Holy Orders se 
The Conferring of Maas ‘orders as 
The Ordination of Clerics 
The Ordination of Doorkeepers .. 
The Ordination of Readers .. 
The Ordination of Exorcists 
The Ordination of Acolytes 
The Ordination of Subdeacons 
The Ordination of Deacons 
The Ordination of Priests 
The Consecration of a Bishop 


A Form of Admission to the Liberal Catholic 
Chureh a : : ‘ 


Admission of a Singer 
Admission of a Server 
Blessings : : 
The Blessings of ‘Holy Water 
The Blessing of a Church Bell 
The Blessing of Objects in General . 
The Blessing of a House .. 
The Blessing of Holy Oils 
Laying the Foundation Stone of a Church . 
The Consecration of a Church . 
Oceasional Prayers 


eine 


269 
272 
282 
287 
289 
296 
299 
305 
306 
306 
309 
311 
313 
316 
320 
328 
337 
349 


366 
368 
370 
372 
372 
374 
376 
377 
378 
381 
385 
397 


THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC 
CHURCH 


GENERAL INFORMATION 


The Liberal Catholic Church exists to forward the 
work of her Master Christ in the world, and to feed His 
flock. It draws the central inspiration of its work 
from an intense faith in the Living Christ, believing 
that the vitality of a Church gains in proportion as its 
members cease to think only of a Christ Who lived 
two thousand years ago, and strive rather to serve as 
a vehicle for the Eternal Christ, Who ever lives as a 
mighty spiritual Presence in the world, guiding and 
sustaining His people. ‘*Lo, I am with you alway, 
even unto the consummation of the age.’’ ‘‘ Before 
Abraham was, I am.’’ 


The Liberal Catholic Church is an independent and 
self-governing body; neither Roman Catholic nor pro- 
testant—but Catholic. It traces its Episcopal Suce- 
cession to the Old Catholic Church of Holland, and 
came into existence as the result of a re-organization 
in 1916 of the Old Catholic Church in Great Britain. 
It aims at combining the traditional sacramental form 
of worship—with its stately ritual, its deep mysticism 
and its abiding witness to the reality of sacramental 
grace—with the widest measure of intellectual liberty 
and respect for the individual conscience. It there- 
fore permits to its members freedom of interpreta- 
tion of the Seriptures, the Creeds and the Liturgy. 
Regarding the mind as one of the great avenues to 
spiritual apprehension, it encourages among its ad- 
herents the freest play of scientific or philosophic 
thought. 


It welcomes to its Altars all who reverently and sin- 
cerely approach them, erecting no barriers in the nature 
ef standards of dogmatic belief. It has no wish 


6 GENERAL INFORMATION. 








to proselytize, inthe aggressive sense, from among 
the adherents of any other Church, and as an earnest 
of this welcomes people to regular’ and full partici- 
pation in its services without asking or expecting them 
to leave their original Church. 


The Liberal Catholic Church is a living Christian 
Church—‘‘ modernist,’’ in that it maintains that the 
form of religion should keep pace with human growth 
and enlightenment; ‘‘historic,’’ in that it holds that 
the Church has handed down a very precious heritage 
from the Christ Himself. 


PREFACE 


Some brief explanation of the principles which have 

. guided the writing of this Liturgy of the Liberal 

Catholic Church may help the reader to understand 
its spirit and aim. 


It will be seen that the word Liturgy, as applied 
- to this book, is not restricted to the Order of the cele- 
bration of the Holy Eucharist, as in the Hastern 
Church. It is applied, rather, to the entire order of 
public worship and administration of the Sacraments, 
officially authorized—such, indeed, as would usually be 
described by the adjective ‘‘liturgical’’—as distinct 
from public or private devotions, services of preach- 
ing and praise, extempore worship and so forth, which 
may be permitted but are not prescribed. 


The movement from which the Liberal Catholic 
Church originated used the Roman Liturgy, but the 
complete re-organization of the movement upon its 
present basis of the widest freedom involved a corres- 
pondingly drastic revision of the Liturgy. The Roman 
Liturgy was chosen as the basis for that revision. As 
all students of the subject are aware, the Roman Liturgy 
is a composite product, derived from a variety of an- 
cient sources. It appears to have grown up by a pro- 
cess of absorption, and notably by the absorption of 
a widespread Gallican use, which in its turn had 
oriental affiliations. It bears all the marks of this 
antiquity and composite structure. Antiquity, in this 
case, carries with it both advantages and disadvantages. 
It carries us nearer to the stream of pure tradition 
emanating from the Christ Himself—but within what 
distance’ we do not know. But it also carries us back 
to a culture immeasurably more limited than ours. 
Many of the earlier communities of Christians appear 
to have been at quite a low level of development, such 
as those Corinthians to whom St. Paul addressed his 
Epistle. If we glance critically at one of the earlier 
liturgies known to history—the Sacramentary of Sara- 


8 PREFACE 





pion—we soon discover that the fragments therein pre- 
served reflect an outlook naturally to be expected among 
a primitive agricultural community. The Roman Lit-. 
urgy, too, suffers on account of its very antiquity; des- 
pite, and maybe in some ways because of, its various 
recensions. 


Rendered in Latin, its frequent crudity of concep- 
tion commonly escapes detection, but a critical examin- 
ation of its meaning speedily shows how ill-suited it 
is to modern use, and this judgment is apt to be height- 
ened by the evident difficulty of translating the well- 
rounded Latin in which it is cast into the English 
tongue, and by the uncouth rendering which would seem 
to have been adopted by its various translators almost 
of set purpose, as though to emphasize the inferiority of 
the vernacular as a vehicle of liturgical expression. 


The Roman Liturgy, moreover, is full of expressions 
which indicate fear of God, of His wrath and of the 
prospect of everlasting hell; and these in their turn 
evoke other expressions of servile cringing .and self- 
abasement, abject appeals for merey, even culminating 
in. naive attempts to bargain with the Almighty. The 
evil is so patent to anyone who pauses to look for it, 
that a couple of specimens of this language will suffice 
by way of illustration. ‘‘We therefore beseech Thee, 
O Lord, to be appeased and to receive this offering....; 
grant that we may be rescued from eternal damn- 
ation.....’? ‘‘Hear us, O God of. our salvation, 
and deliver Thy people from the terrors of divine anger, 
and make them secure by the bountifulness. of Thy 
merey.’’ It ought to be impossible for thinking men 
of our day to have to repeat this crude anthropomorph- 
ism. In one sense, of course, all our conceptions of 
God. must inevitably be anthropomorphic. Whatever 
we think of Him is the product of the human mind; 
whatever, indeed, has been revealed to us concerning 
the Divine Nature is set in terms capable of being 
grasped by our finite minds. Still, it is a fair canon 
to demand that He shall be interpreted in terms of that 
which is best and noblest in our human nature, and not 
in terms of that which is worst, and of which we our- 





PREFACE ) 


selves are ashamed. The Roman Liturgy is the worst 
offender in these respects, but the Anglican Liturgy also, 
though much less crude, is far from blameless. The 
Greek Liturgies are very much less overcast with this 
greyness of fear and gloom; they dwell more on the 
love of God. 

In this Liberal Catholic Church these disfiguring ele- 
ments have been eliminated, as derogatory alike to the 
idea of a loving Father and to the men whom He has 
ereated in His own image. If Christians had been 
content to take what Christ taught of the Father in 
heaven, they would never have saddled themselves with 
the jealous, angry, bloodthirsty Jehovah of Ezra, 
Nehemiah and the others—a god who needs propitiating 
and to whose ‘‘mercy’’ constant appeals must be 
made. Moreover, the knowledge of Eastern religions, 
arid of the faiths of ancient Egypt and Babylon, that 
has increasingly become available in our times, has en- 
tirely dispelled the illusion that the Jews had any mon- 
opoly of divine truth. and proportionately lessens the 
value of the Old Testament as an integral basis of the 
Christian faith. 

On the same principle our Liturgy rejects the impre- 
cations of the heathen and passages of cursing that 
- are so characteristic, unfortunately, alike of the Psalms 
and of the history of the Christian Church. Their use 
is totally foreign to the spirit of Christ, and while 
they may have been less inexcusable in days of perse- 
cution and internecine strife, Christianity no longer has 
place for them. It is, indeed, difficult to pick out more 
than a handful of Psalms unmarred in their entirety ~ 
by such passages. Hence, with a view to preserving 
for our worship language and sentiments that are sub- 
lime, and at the same time escaping this  diffi- 
culty, we have been emboldened to _ construct 
psalms, epistles and gospels, by a system of 
cento selection. We are well aware that apologists 
contend that the passages and sentiments to which we 
take exception are susceptible of another and gentler 
interpretation. Thus the wrath of God means the ill- 
consequences that inevitably attend a breach of His 
laws. Such explanations, while they soften the asper- 





10 : PREFACE 





ity of the original passages, read like the special plead- 
ings of people who are tied to a liturgy or to a view of 
Seripture that is obsolete; and in any case do not Te- 
move the objection that the passages convey a false im- 
pression. 


The composite structure of the Roman Liturgy is also 
evident to the student in the overlapping with which it 
abounds, particularly in the baptismal and ordination 
services, and in the occurrence of phrases that bear slight. 
relation to their context or accompanying manual ae- 
tions, or sometimes little meaning at all. These are 
attributable to a process of what we may eall ‘‘tele- 
scoping’’ one liturgy into another, with the result that, 
for example, when a certain action of the rite has duly 
been performed, according to the sequence of one lit- 
urgy, prayers from another rite then follow, having 
the effect of reiterating the request for its perform: 
ance. Some commentators recognize these inconsist- 
encies; others appear to explain them as ‘‘ dramatic 
anticipations’’ or ‘ ‘postponements,’’ or as indicating 
a period of thought when the precise moment of an ac. 
tion was not defined, or even by the simple expedient 
of remarking that it takes time to say things. 


Another recurring element of the older liturgies is 
that of petition for personal and temporal advantages. Our 
Lord taught us very definitely the virtue of confidence 
in the ‘‘Good Law’’; that not a sparrow falls to the 
ground without the knowledge of our heavenly Father. 
We have sought to interpret the spirit of our age by 
substituting joyous aspirational utterance for such tem- 
poral petition, and encouraging our worshippers to for- 
get themselves—indeed, to find their truc selves—in 
thoughtfulness for others. 


It has been a wrench to lay aside many familiar pas- 
sages, round which have clustered a multitude of happy 
memories. Yet it is clear that long continued use and 
happy associations, especially those of childhood, will 
deaden the mind to sentiments that are indefensible. 
This is eminently true of popular hymns, where the 
music also tends to obscure the words. In thus giving 


PREFACE 11 





the head precedence over the heart, we may find conso- 
lation in the fact that we write for a new generation, 
who, have no such associations. Moreover, it is signi- 
ficant that in newer countries, like the Antipodes and the 
United States of America, where numbers of people 
have grown up without bible or Church, the judgment 
at once condemns such passages. The most conserva- 
tive among us may wonder how people can gravely sing: 


Whatever, Lord, we lend to Thee 

Repaid a thousand-fold will be; 

Then gladly we will give to Thee, 
Who givest all. 


In the Gloria in Excelsis, the phrase ‘‘ Lamb of God’’ 
has been eliminated, as such zoological characterization 
of our Lord does not impress the virgin mind with any- 
thing but a sense of the ridiculous. Once in the Canon, 
where the symbology of the allusion is explained, the 
phrase has been kept. 


We were disappointed to find the Greek Liturgies 
quite unsuitable for use in our work of revision. To 
define clearly the element which renders them thus un- 
suitable is difficult. It is somewhat similar, perhaps, 
to that which distinguishes the outlook of some nations 
from that of others. Some Celtic poets, for example, 
may be accused of a tendency to lapse into language 
that sounds beautiful, regardless of its meaning any- 
thing in particular. So in Latin countries one finds 
people apt to pay more attention to the manner of say- 
ing a thing than to the value of the thing said. On 
the other hand, the scientist will often express his facts 
in language that is precise and accurate, but with no 
thought for beauty of utterance or for the larger ideas 
which in the scheme of things lie behind the minor in- 
vestigations he has recorded. The Greek Liturgies 
come before us like a sea of beautiful language, but 
they do not appear to be constructed on any framework 
whatever of coherent and consecutive thought. The 
same applies in a measure to the Roman Liturgy, 
though the wealth and profusion of language is here 
wanting. Now, the actions of the Holy Eucharist (and, 


12 PREFACE 





indeed, of certain other services) are part of a defin- 
ite scheme of symbolism and efficacy. Beautiful language 
serves to stir people to devotion, though often that de- 
votion is vague; but if the co-operation of the mind 
can also be enlisted, the effect will obviously be greater 
not only on the individual worshipper, but on the re- 
sulting process as a whole. We have tried in this 
Liturgy to present, as it were, a new facet of these 
things, and while clothing our thought in language that 
is stately and beautiful, to make that thought corres- 
pond with the sequence of action. 


Many ceremonies of the older liturgies are interest- 
ing from the archeological standpoint; but it has been 
no part of our purpose to retain archeology for the sake 
of archeology. As we find a vernacular liturgy to be 
provocative of an infinitely greater response from our 
congregations than the use of Latin, so in other re- 
spects also we have studied efficiency in preference to 
archeological interest, believing that the truest rever- 
ence is shown by best helping the people for, whose 
worship the Liturgy is written, 


It is intended that the public worship should be 
‘‘congregational’’ in character. The ‘‘priesthood of 
the laity’’ is no empty phrase, and expression should 
be given to the truth which it embodies. There is 
evidence that originally the Holy Eucharist was more 
of a corporate act of worship than it came to be in 
later days when the laity could neither read nor follow 
the Latin. With the spread of education, the growth 
of intelligence, and the advantage of a vernacular lit- 
urgy, there is no reason at all why the laity should ‘‘as- 
sist’’ at the Holy Eucharist in the capacity of passive 
spectators only, or be debarred from following step by 
step what is taking place at the Altar. Liturgy means 
“public work or service,’’ not merely in the sense of 
work done by the public, but also of work for, or 
on behalf of, the publie at large. It is significant, 
too, that the termination of the word is related etymo- 
logically to our ‘‘urge’’ or ““energy.’? 


In our conception, worship has a threefold aspect 
and purpose. It is firstly the offering of “‘‘worth- 





PREFACE 13 





ship’’—that is, praise and honour—to Almighty God. 
Secondly, it is intended to help the worshippers. And 
thirdly—most important of all—it is intended to help 
the surrounding world at large, through the instrumen- 
tality of the worshippers, by pouring out upon it a 
great flood of spiritual power. We may safely say that 
God Himself does not need our praise, and certainly 
would not appreciate anything in the nature of adula- 
tion from those who might be expected to know better. 
We feel and know, on the other hand, that it is good 
for us to lift up our hearts in praise and aspiration, and 
to strive to unify ourselves more completely with the 
divine will, But we may go further and say with 
all reverence that God does make use of our co-opera- 
tion, and in His plan counts on that intelligent and en- 
ergetic co-operation more and more as man grows into 
spiritual maturity. The Liberal Catholic Church aims 
at making its members strong and efficient workers in 
His service. It tries to help them to realize the di- 
vine Light in themselves—the Light which lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world, but which too 
often is veiled and hidden by ignorance and wrong- 
doing—and then to see that Light in the heart of 
others, and to help them to unveil its divine splendour. 

It remains for us to acknowledge indebtedness to 
other liturgies. As already explained, the Roman 
Liturgy has been our model. In its passage through 
the ages it has preserved the dramatic symbolism and 
manual acts of the various rites with remarkable fidel- 
ity. From the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom we have 
adapted the well-known prayer used in the Anglican 
Church, and a number of beautiful phrases which 
have been combined into the prayer in our Eucharist, 
‘“‘Unto Thee, O Perfect One.’’ We have availed our- 
selves of many sentences and collects from the Angli- 
ean Book of Common Prayer. - That book was an at- 
tempt, like ours, to revise and simplify the Roman 
Liturgy. Of parts of it we may enthusiastically echo 
the words of an Anglican prelate who spoke of it as 
‘¢our incomparable liturgy,’’ for the stateliness and 
virility of its English are unmatched. Unfortunately 
its Communion Office is sadly disarranged, and is shorn 


14 PREFACE 





of the richness of the older rites, so much so that it has 
been described as ‘‘the baldest Eucharistic rite im 
Christendom,’’ and numbers of earnest Anglican Priests 
find it desirable to re-introduce thereinto a considerable 
portion of the Roman rite. The ‘‘authorized version’’ of 
the Scriptures has for the most part been used, for al- 
though the ‘‘revised version’’ is certainly a more faithful 
rendering of the original, it still leaves so much to be de- 
sired as not to compensate, in our opinion, for the loss 
of the majestic English of the King James’ version. 
We have followed Roman precedent in omitting from 
their context verses not germane to the main purpose 
of the Epistles and Gospels. Finally, we are in- 
debted to the beautiful Liturgy of the ‘‘Catholic 
Apostolic’? or so-called ‘‘Irvingite’’ Church for a few 
stately sentences incorporated in our rites of Ordina- 
tion, and for one prayer in our Consecration of a Church. 
Two sentences in the Holy Hucharist beginning ‘‘Un- 
der the veil of earthly things’’ come from a source 
that we are unable to trace. 


The rubrics are designed to indicate sufficiently to 
the people the sequence of the ceremonies, that they, 
may follow what is taking place. For the Priest more 
detailed instructions are issued. 


[The General Information and Preface, together with 
most of the Notes preceding each of the Services in this 
Book, are the work of our first Presiding Bishop, the 
Right Reverend James Ingall Wedgwood, to whom the 
Liberal Catholic Church owes a debt of the deepest 
gratitude. To his wide erudition and his indefatigable 
labours the compilation of this Liturgy is due. 


el c. W. LEADBEATER, 
Presiding Bishop. ] 
The Feast of the Epiphany, 
1924. 


A TABLE OF ALL THE FEASTS AND HOLY 
DAYS OBSERVED IN THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC 
CHURCH THROUGHOUT THE YEAR 





All Sundays in the Year 

The Days of Date Class Colour 
Nativity of our Lord (Christmas) Dee. 25 A White 
New Year (Octave of Christ- 


WAS Pace sq eee epee. ao hee Wihate 
The Epiphany .. .. re 6 A White 
Baptism of our Lord, 2 15 <A White 
Transfiguration pi 97. A White 
Presentation of our Lord in | the 

Temple (Candlemas) .. .. Feb. 2 3B White 
The First Day of Lent .... Movable <A _ Violet 
*St. David, Archbishop (Wales) March 1 C White 
SSt. Patrick, Bishop (Ireland) _,, 17 .C White 
Annunéiation of our pis (haty 

Day) . : 25 ,C White 
Maundy Thursday . ss... Movable A White 
GoodPriday os. aa o- 1 = 0 ee Movables pA Vaolet 
Holy Saturday a... -..-- -.as) Movable, «As Vaolet 
*St. George, Martyr (England) April 23 C Red 
Ascension Day .. .. .. .. «» Movable A- White 
Corpus Christi .. .. .. .. .. Movable A White 
Stee Albany Mar iy tics =. (cif. weisioaeOlINe 2a 5G) Red 
St. John Baptist .. .. & 24 € White 
St. Peter and the Holy “Apostles 3 290 Red 
Assumption of our Lady .. .. Aug 15 A White 
Nativity of our Lady .. .. .. .. Sept. 8 © White 
St. Michael and All Angels 

(Michaelmas) yey eae. leler 5s 29 A White 
A SOUUSGMIOUN se es) ON OW wll A White 
All Souls’ Day .. . 2 <A Violet 

*St. Andrew, a & M. Coot 
jand) Bs we eoe WOE a 30) € Red 





*These Feasts are optional, except in the countries 
indicated, where they are celebrated as Feasts of the 
rank of Class A. The Feasts which have octaves are 
printed in italics. 

In the British Empire it is customary to hold services 
of thanksgiving on Empire Day (May 24) and Armis- 
tice Day (November 11). 


A TABLE OF THE SUNDAYS THROUGHOUT 





THE YEAR 
Sundays in Advent 
Class Colour 
The First .. A Violet 
Second .. . C Violet 
Third (Gaudete Sunday) B Rose 
Hourth) . .~. ; Peal © Violet 
Sundays after Ciictmas 
The First .. C White 
Second .. C White 
Sundays after the Epiphany 
The First . C White 
Second .. C Green 
nine Ae se C Green 
‘Hourthie.. e. C Green 
Pitth .. Cc Green 
Sixth Cc Green 
Septuagesima .. B - Red 
Sexagesima ......... .. B Red 
Quinquagesima .. .. .. A Red 
Sundays in Lent 
The First B Violet 
Second .. C Violet 
ED hor dae a. 0 Pe See eee Violet 
Fourth (Letare or Re- 
freshment Sunday) .. B Rose 
Fifth (Passion Sunday) . C Violet 
Sixth (Palm ee A Violet 
Easter Sunday .. .. A White 
Sundays after Easter 
The First (Low pan gayy B White 
: Second i Cc White 
Third .. Cc White 
Fourth .. C White 
Fifth . C White 
Sunday after Ascension Day . Cc White 
Whitsunday So., SERSer Red 
Trinity Sunday A White 


A TABLE OF THE SUNDAYS THROUGHOUT 
; THE YEAR—Continued 





Sundays after Trinity 


Class Colour 
The First (The Sunday within 
the Octave of oo 


Christi) C White 
Second .. D Green 
Raids Bek oes D Green 
Mowurthy 0 2. D Green 
Fifth D Green 
Sixth Sa atreee Rata ora An at el b)) Green 
EViemiihin Re, coe irac spect Red 
Highth . D Green 
ING D Green 
Tenth .. D Green 
Eleventh .. . D Green 
Twelfth .. .. D Green 
minteenthi- sey) sen. cite aD Green 
Hourteenthyye eae ee Green 
Fifteenth .. B Red 
Sixteenth .. D Green 
Seventeenth D Green 
Eighteenth D Green 
Nineteenth .. D Green 
Twentieth .. D Green 
Twenty-first D Green 
Twenty-second D Green 
UthyiGaminylnnnol ees ce aie Go aD) Green 
Dem Gy eOUm UH cr. Jy-te are aja) el). Green 
Twenty-fifth D Green 
Twenty-sixth .. . D Green 
Sunday before Advent B Red 





RULES 


GOVERNING THE PRECEDENCE OF 
FEASTS AND HOLY DAYS 


- ]. Whenever two Holy-Days fall upon the same day, 
the Collect, Epistle and Gospel used shall be those of 
the Day which holds the higher rank, but the Collect 
of the other shall be recited after that of the Day. 


II. Whenever two Holy-Days of equal rank fall upon 
the same day, the priest shall decide which Day he will 
celebrate; but the Collect of the other shali be recited 
after that of the Day preferred. 


III. Whenever a Holy Day (with the exceptions noted 
in Rule IV) falls within the octave* of another Fes- 
tival, the Collect, Epistle and Gospel of the former 
shall be used, but the Collect of the latter shall be 
recited after that of the Day; except that on the actual 
Day of a Festival of Class A there shall be no com- 
memoration, only the Collect of the Festival itself being 
used—save that on All Souls’ Day the Collect for All 
Saints’ shall be recited, as hereinafter directed. 


IV. Whenever a Sunday of Class C or D falls 
within the octave of a Festival, the Collect, Epistle 
and Gospel of the Festival shall be used, but the Col- 
lect of the Sunday shall be recited after that of the 
‘Day. 


V. The Dedication Festival of a church has an ce- 
tave and takes precedence of all but the greatest Feasts 
of the Year. 


VI. The Festival of the Patron Saint of any church 
is for that church a Feast of the rank of Class A, and 
has an octave. 


*Certain Festivals are celebrated for eight days; the 
eighth day is called the ‘‘octave,’’ the intermed- 
jate days being ‘‘within the octave.’ 


RULES 


TO KNOW WHEN MOVABLE FEASTS 
OCCUR. 


Advent Sunday is always the nearest Sunday to the 
Beast of St. Andrew, whether before or after. 


Septuagesima is nine weeks before Easter. 
Sexagesima is eight weeks before Easter. 
Quinquagesima is seven weeks before Easter. 


The First Day of Lent or Ash Wednesday is the 
Wednesday preceding the first Sunday in Lent. 


The First Sunday in Lent or Quadragesima is six 
weeks before Easter. 


Refreshment Sunday is the fourth Sunday in Lent 
or three weeks before Easter. 


Passion Sunday is the fifth Sunday in Lent or two 
weeks before Easter. 


Palm Sunday is one week before Easter. 

Maundy Thursday is the Thursday preceding Easter. 
Good Friday is the Friday preceding Easter. 

Holy Saturday is the Saturday preceding Haster. 


Easter Sunday is always the first Sunday after the 
Full Moon, which happens upon or next after the 
wenty-first day of March; if the Full Moon happen 
pon a Sunday, Easter Day is the Sunday after, 


Ascension Day is forty days after Easter. 

Whitsunday is.seven weeks after Easter. 

Trinity Sunday is eight weeks after Haster. 

Corpus Christi is the Thursday next after Trinity 
Sunday. 


Sundays 
after 
Epiphany 


au 


Septua- 
gesima 


A TABLE OF THE MOVABLE FEASTS 


Easter 
Day 


Ascension 
Day 


Whitsun- 
day 


Corpus 
Christi 


Sundays 
after 
Trinity 





Feb. 
Feb. 


17 
8 


Apr. 
Apr. 


May 
May 


29 
21 


June 
May 


June 
June 


19 
II 


23 
24 








Jan, 
Feb. 
Feb, 
Jan, 
Feb, 


31 
13 

5 
27 
16 


Apr. 
Apr. 
Apr. 
Mar. 
Apr. 


May 
May 
May 
May 
May 


13 
26 
17 

9 
29 


May 
June 
May 
May 
June 


June 
June 
June 
May 
June 


3 
16 


7 
30 
19 


25 
23 
25 
26 
23 








Feb, 
Jan. 
Feb. 
Jan, 
Feb. 


I 
24 
12 
28 
17 


Apr. 
Mar. 
Apr. 
Apr. 
Apr. 


May 
May 
May 
May 
May 


14 

5 
25 
10 
30 


May 
May 
June 
May 
June 


June 
May 
June 
May 
June 


4 
26 
15 
31 
20 


25 
26 
24 
20 
23 








3 
5 
4 
2 
5 
3 
2 
5 
3 
5 
4 
2 
5 
4 
2 


Feb, 
Jan. 
Feb, 
Feb, 
Jan. 


9 
24 
13 

b) 
21 


Apr. 
Mar. 
Apr. 
Apr. 
Mar. 


May 
May 
May 
May 
May 


21 
6 
26 
18 
2 


May 
May 
June 
May 
May 


June 
May 
June 
June 
May 


i 
27 
16 

8 


23 





24 
26 
23 
25 
27 











WE AWA 


*Leap Year 





Feb. 
Feb. 
Feb. 
Feb. 
Jan. 


9 
I 


21 
6 





Apr. 
Apr. 
Apr. 
Apr 
Apr. 








May 
May 
June 
May 
May 


22 
14 

3 
18 
fo 





June 
May 
June 
May 
May 





June 
June 
June 
June 
May 


12 
4 
24, 
8 
31 





24 
25 
22 
25 
26 








NOTES AND DIRECTIONS 


The Church’s Year 


The Churehs year divides itself into two portions. 
The first portion, from Advent to Whitsuntide, is de- 
voted to the commemoration of the various scenes in 
the mystery-drama of the life of the Christ, which in 
itself, as Origen pointed out, is typical of the life of 
every Christian. The second portion, embracing all 
the Sundays after Trinity, is left for the practice of the 
virtues inculcated in the former. 


It has been thought desirable to assign something 
in the nature of a leading thought to Sundays in 
the latter portion not already marked out by the 
Church, and to certain others jn the earlier half of the 
year. These leading thoughts or intents might have 
been wider in their range, had it not been for the diffi- 
eulty of gathering together suitable Epistles and Gos- 
pels. 


A special day has been set apart as the Festival of 
the Baptism of our Lord, and the date for the Trans- 
figuration has been advanced, so as to make that oe- 
eurrence fit into the proper sequence of the Gospel nar- 
rative. 


In addition to Whitsunday, six Sundays have been 
marked out for special devotion to the Third Person of 
the Blessed Trinity; namely, the Sunday before Advent, 
the three Sundays. before Lent, and two others after 
Trinity. Besides encouraging a devotion that is cur- 
iously neglected, this plan has the advantage of intro- 
dueing red as the colour of some Sundays. 


The number of Saints’ Days to be observed in this 
Calendar is reduced to a minimum. There is much 
to «favour the contention that the whole system of 
such commemorations is an anachronism, which might 
be allowed for the most part to drop into abeyance 





22 NOTES AND DIRECTIONS ~~ 


without impairing the reality of our belief in the 

communion of saints. The Roman Calendar is over- : 
laden with saints, of whom few excite any real devo- 

tion at this distance of time, while others undoubted- 

ly. are mythical or transformed pagan deities. One 

may well contrast with these the many genuine saints— : 
men and women of to-day—living in our midst. Our 

clergy, however, are free to observe the various com- 

memorations, if they prefer to do so. 


In regard to commemorations we follow the ordinary — 
custom of the Church. When two festivals concur, 
we use’ the service of the more important of the two, 
and in addition recite the Collect of the other in order 
that our people may not overlook it. 


Ecclesiastical Colours 


The colour of certain of the vestments and of the 
Altar frontal varies accogding to the season of the year 
or festival being observed. 


White is the colour of joy, and is used on great festi- 
vals, on those of our Lady, of Angels and of Saints 
who are not martyrs. It synthesizes all the colours, 

Red is used on festivals of the Holy Ghost, of 
apostles and of martyrs. Its influence is that of ex- 
pansiveness and glowing power. 

Violet is used in Lent and Advent, at times of self- 
examination and preparation, at exorcisms and the 
visitation of the sick and at funerals. Lying at the 
opposite end of the spectrum to red, its influence is 
cleansing, actinic, piercing. 

Green is used after Epiphany and Trinity. It holds 
the balance in the middle of the spectrum, and its in- 
fluence is one of: sympathy and general good-will. 

Rose, by ancient custom, Supersedes violet on the 
Fourth Sunday in Lent and the Third Sunday in Ad- 
vent, but its use is left to the discretion of the Priest 
in charge. It indicates the love which is the central 
thought in those seasons of preparation. 


Black is not used in the Liberal Catholie rite, 


NOTES AND DIRECTIONS 23 
The Altar and tts Appointments 


The Altar, and not the pulpit, is the central feature 
of the Church, since it is the celebration of the Divine 
Mysteries, and not preaching, that is of the essence of 
our worship. At the back of the Altar stands the 
tabernacle wherein the Blessed Sacrament of Christ’s 
Body is reserved, giving to the Church the unspeakable 
privilege of His abiding Presence. Six large candles 
are lighted at the more important services; these with 
the lamp which burns before the Altar, as a visible 
token of Christ’s perpetual Presence, represent the 
‘seven Spirits before the throne of God’’ (Revelation 
i. 4). 


The Vestments 


The vestments worn by the Priest date from the 
earliest times of Christianity, and are, in point of 
fact, an adaptation in various respects of the prevail- 
ing civil dress of that day. They are part of the 
general scheme by which spiritual power is spread out 
upon the congregation; they also have their esthetic 
value and symbolical significance. It is not without 
due and careful consideration that they have been re- 
tained in the Liberal Catholic Church. 


Incense 


The offering of incense has been retained not only 
because it is an ancient, beautiful and honourable cus- 
tom, typifying the prayers of the saints ascending hbe- 
fore the throne of God, but also because it is the 
universally employed means of helping to purify the 
hearts and minds of the people and to distribute spirit- 
ual power. 


The Sign of the Cross 


Two varieties of cross are printed in the Liturgy. 
Wherever the Maltese cross appears, it is intended that 
the people should reverently cross themselves. The 


24 NOTES AND DIRECTIONS 





other plain crosses indicate manual acts on the part 
of the officiant, where he makes the ‘‘sign of power’’ 
either over himself or others or over objects. These 
crosses are not made by the congregation, but are 
printed in order that the latter may the more intelli- — 
gently follow the liturgy. 2 


The use of this sign, whether liturgical or personal, 
can be traced to the earliest times of Christianity. 
When a man makes it over himself it is designed to 
promote self-recollectedness; to remind him of the 
Name which it symbolizes and to help him to realize 
that where that Name is invoked we trust no evil shall 
ensue. It is a kind of miniature creed expressed in 
action instead of in words, for as we touch first the fore- 
head and then the solar plexus it reminds us how 
“*for us men and for our salvation’’ Christ came down 
from the Father, Who is Head over all, to this earth, 
to the physical plane, the lower part of His creation; 
while as we touch first the left shoulder and then the 
right we remember that He passed from earth into 
hades, typified as on the left hand of God, and pro- 
ceeded thence to sit in glory for ever on the right 
hand of the Father. It further suggests that we 
consecrate mind and heart and the organs of action to 
the service of God. 


But in addition to all this, the sign of the cross is 
the Christian ‘‘sign of power’’; it is a vehicle of spir- 
itual force, flowing sometimes from the Priest to the 
congregation, sometimes from on high into Priest and 
people. Made over ourselves, it will draw around us 
unseen influences which will tend to drive away un- 
wholesome thoughts, and at the same time make it eas- 
ier to retain what is good. 


The Hymns 
Of the few hymns incorporated in the text 
of this liturgy, nearly all are translations 


(sometimes slightly altered) of old Latin hymns. 
Of the others, O Master, I have promised, 
Take up thy cross, the Master said, The Voice that 


NOTES AND DIRECTIONS 25 


_ breathed o’er Eden, Immortal Love and Great Master, 
Whose Name is the Healer, are favourite hymns (again 
in slightly adapted form), written respectively by J. E. 
Bode, C. W. Everest and others, John Keble, J. G. 
Whittier, and Lucy Larecom. The only hymn by 
a living author is the beautiful Closed is the solemn hour, 
written by one of our own Church members, Mr. HE. Ar- 
mine Wodehouse, M.A., whom we have also to thank for 
some very beautiful emendations and additions to the 
Benediction Litany. We who use these hymns owe a 
tribute of gratitude to their authors. 


On the Saying of Services 


The Liturgy is arranged in general for the singing of 
the public Offices. Where they are said, the sentences 
of antiphons and psalms or canticles are repeated alter- 
nately by Priest and people. All join in the Gloria— 
also in the Introit, the Gloria in excelsis, the Creed, the 
Sanctus, and the Communio. 


In the private daily Celebration of the Priest his 
server (if he have one) should recite the part assigned 
to the people. If there be no server, the Priest recites 
the whole. 


THE 


COLLECTS, EPISTLES AND 
GOSPELS 


TO BE USED THROUGHOUT THE YEAR. 


The Collect, Hpistle and Gospel appointed for the 
Sunday shall serve all the week after, where tt is not in 
this Book otherwise ordered. 


The Collect appointed for any Sunday or other Feast 
should be used at the Evening Service of the day before, 
if that Service be later than sia o’clock. 


Adnuent Sunday 


The Collect 


O CHRIST our Lord, we pray for strength to cast 
away the works of darkness and put upon us the ar- 
mour of light, that we may prepare ourselves not 
only to keep aright Thy holy Feast of Christmas, but 
also faithfully and acceptably to serve Thee when 
Thou shalt come again, to Whom we ever offer heart- 
felt love and worship. R. Amen, 


This Collect 1s to be repeated every day, after the 
Collect appointed for the day, until Christmas Eve. 
The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the thirteenth chapter of 
that of St. Paul the Apostle to the Romans, beginning 
at the first verse. 


LET every soul be subject unto the higher powers; 


a 


ADVENT SUNDAY 27 





for there is no power but of God, and the powers that 
be are ordained of God. Render therefore to all their 
dues; tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom 
custom; honour to whom honour. Owe no man 
anything, but to love one another; for he that loveth 
another hath fulfilled the law. Love worketh no ill 
to his neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of 
the law. And that, knowing the time, that now it 
is high time to awake out of sleep; for now is our 
salvation nearer than when we believed. The night is 
far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the 
works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of 
light. Let us walk honestly, as in the day: not in 
rioting and drunkenness, not in strife and envying; 
for none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth 
to himself. Let not then your good be evil spoken 
of, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; for the king- 
dom of God is righteousness, and peace and joy in 
the Holy Ghost. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-first chap- 
ter of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the 
twenty-seventh verse. 


THEN shall they see the Son of Man coming in 
a cloud with power and great glory. When these 
things begin to:come to pass, then look up and lift 
up your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh. 
And take heed to yourselves, lest at. any time your 
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and with the 
cares of this life, and so that day come upon you un- 
awares. Watch ye therefore, that ye may be ac- 
counted worthy to escape all these things that shall 
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. 
In your patience possess ye your souls; heaven and 
earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass 


away. 


28 SECOND SUNDAY IN ADVENT 


ae Second Sunday in Adnent. 
The Collect 


O GOD, Creator and Preserver of mankind, we 
thank Thee for Thy never-failing love, and do most 
earnestly desire and resolve to show forth Thy praise 
not only with our lips, but in our lives, by giving 
up ourselves to Thy service, and by walking before 
Thee in holiness and righteousness all our days, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fifth chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Thessalon- 
jans, beginning at the eleventh verse. 


WHEREFORE comfort yourselves together and 
edify one another, and be at peace among yourselves. 
We exhort you, brethren, warn them which are un- 
ruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak, 
be patient toward all men. See that none render 
evil for evil unto any man, but ever follow that 
which is good, both among yourselves and to all 


men. Rejoice evermore, and in everything give 
thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus 
concerning you. Quench not the Spirit; prove all 


things; hold fast that which is good and abstain 
from all appearance of evil. And the very God of 
peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole 
spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourth chapter 
of that according to St. Mark, beginning at the twenty- 
fourth verse. 


THIRD SUNDAY IN ADVENT 29 





TAKE heed what ye hear; with what measure ye 
mete, it shall be measured to you; and unto you that 
hear shall more be given. For he that hath, to him 
shall be given; and he that hath not, from him shall 
be taken even that which he hath. So is the king- 
dom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the 
ground and should sleep and rise night and day 
and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth 
not how. For the earth bringeth forth fruit of her- 
self: first the blade, then the ear, and after that 
the full corn in the ear. But when the fruit is brought 
forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because 
the harvest is come. Whereunto shall we liken the 
kingdom of God? Or with what comparison shall 
we compare it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, 
which when it is sown in the earth is less than 
all the seeds that be in the earth; but when it is 
sown it groweth up, and becometh greater than all 
herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the 
fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it. 





Che Third Sunday in Adnent 
The Collect 


GRANT us, O Lord, so to prepare and make ready 
Thy way, by turning the hearts of the disobedient 
to the wisdom of the just, that when Thou shalt 
come to teach the world, the ground may be found 
fit for Thy sowing, Thou Who art the Teacher alike 
of Angels and of men. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the first chapter of the Book of the 
Prophet Malachi, beginning at the eleventh verse. 


FROM the rising of the sun even unto the going 
down of the same My Name shall be great among 


30 THIRD SUNDAY IN ADVENT 


the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be 
offered unto My Name and a pure offering. Be- 
hold, I will send My messenger, and he shall prepare 
the way before Me; and the Lord Whom ye seek 
shall suddenly come to His temple, even the messen- 
ger of the covenant whom ye delight in; behold, He 
shall come, saith the Lord of Hosts. But who may 
abide the day of His coming; and who shall stand 
when He appeareth? For He is like a refiner’s 
fire, and like fullers’ soap. And He shall sit as a 
refiner and purifier of silver; and He shall purify 
the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and sil- 
ver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering 
in righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah 
and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord; and they 
shall be Mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day 
when I make up My jewels. 
Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the first chapter of 
that according to St. Mark, beginning at the first verse. 


THE beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the 
Son of God; as it is written in the prophets: Behold, 
I send my messenger before Thy face, which shall 
prepare Thy way before Thee; the voice of one cry- 
ing in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make His paths straight. John did baptize 
in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repent- 
ance for the remission of sins. And there went out 
unto him all the land of Judzea, and they of Jeru- 
salem, and were all baptized of him in the river 
Jordan, confessing their sins. And John was clothed 
with camel’s hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his 
loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; and 
preached, saying: There cometh after me One might- 
ier than I, the latchet of Whose shoes I am not 
worthy to stoop down and unloose. I indeed have 
baptized you with water, but He shall baptize you 
with the Holy Ghost. 


FOURTH SUNDAY IN ADVENT 31 


Che Faurth Sunday in Adnent 
The Collect 


ALMIGHTY everliving God, we pray Thee to in- 
Spire continually Thy universal Church with the 
spirit of truth, unity and concord, that all they who 
do confess Thy holy Name may agree in the truth of 
Thy holy Word, and live in unity and godly love, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the twelfth chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians, 
beginning at the twelfth verse. 


AS the body is one and hath many members, and 
all the members of that body, being many, are one 
body; so also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all 
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gen- 
tiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all 
made to drink into one Spirit. For the body is not 
one member, but many; and the eye cannot say 
unto the hand: I have no need of thee; nor again the 
head to the feet: I have no need of you. There 
should be no schism in the body, but the members 
should have the same care one for another. And 
where one member suffers, all the members suffer 
with it; or one member be honoured, all the members 
rejoice with it. Now ye are the body of Christ, and 
members in particular. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the thirteenth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the third 
verse. 

JESUS, knowing that the Father had given all 
things into His hands, and that He was come from 





32 CHRISTMAS DAY 


God, and went to God, riseth from supper, and laid 
aside His garments; and took a towel, and girded Him- 
self. After that He poured water into a basin, and 
began to wash the disciples’ feet, and to wipe them 
with the towel wherewith He was girded. So after 
He had washed their feet, and had taken His gar- 
ments, and was set down again, He said unto them: 
Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call Me Mas- 
ter and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am. If I 
then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye © 
also ought to wash one another’s feet. For I have 
given you an example, that ye should do as I have 
done to you. Amen, Amen, I say unto you: The 
servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that 
is sent greater than he that sent him. If 
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye 
do them. Amen, Amen, I say unto you: He that 
receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth Me; and he 
that receiveth Me receiveth Him that sent Me. A 
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one 
another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one 
another. By this shall all men know that ye are 
My disciples, if ye have love one to another. 





Che Nativity of our Lord, 
ur Christnas Day 
The Collect 


MOST dear and holy Lord, we praise Thee, we bless 
Thee, with all our hearts do we thank and glorify Thee 
for this Thy wondrous Feast of Christmas, praying 
Thee that as Thou wast born on earth as at this time 
for us, so mayest Thou be born and reign for ever- 
more within the hearts of men, Who with the Father 
and the Holy Spirit art one God throughout all ages 
of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 
The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 











CHRISTMAS DAY 33 





is taken from the seventh chapter of the Book of the 
Prophet Isaiah, beginning at the fourteenth verse, 


THE Lord Himself shall give you a sign: Behold, a 
Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call 
His Name Emmanuel. And it shall be said: The people 
that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they 
that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon 
them hath the light shined. They joy before Thee 
according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice 
when they divide the spoil. For unto us a Child is 
born, unto us a Son is given; and the government 
shall be upon His shoulder; and His Name shall be 
called Wonderful, Counsellor, The Mighty God, The 
Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the in- 
crease of His government and peace there shall be no 
end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, 
to order it and to establish it with judgment and with 
justice from henceforth even for ever. 


Here endeth the Epistle 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the second chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the first verse. 


IT came to pass in those days that there went out a 
decree from Cesar Augustus that all the world should 
be enrolled. And all went to be enrolled, everyone 
into his own city. And Joseph also went up from 
Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, into 
the city of David, which is called Bethlehem (because 
he was of the house and lineage of David) to be 
snrolled with Mary his espoused wife, being great with 
shild. And so it was that, while they were there, 
she days were accomplished that she should be deliv- 
sred. And she brought forth her first-born son, and 
wrapped Him in swaddling clothes, and laid Him ina 
manger because there was no room for them in the 
nn. And there were in the same country shepherds 
wbiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock 

(e 


34 NEW YEAR’S DAY 





by night. And, lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon 
them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about 
them, and they were sore afraid. And the Angel said 


unto them: Fear not, for behold, I bring you good 
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For 


unto you is born this day in the city of David a 


Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a — 


sign unto you; ye shall find the babe wrapped in 
swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly 


there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly 
host praising God, and saying: Glory to God in the | 


highest, and on earth peace, good-will towards men. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 


every day after until Complin on New Year’s Eve, unless 
otherwise ordered. 





New Yrar’s Bay 
The Collect 


LORD Christ, the new-born Child, Who yet art the 
Ancient of Days, we dedicate this new-born year to 


Thee, praying that in it Thy holy Church may love. 
Thee more and serve Thee better, growing ever in 
Thy heavenly wisdom as the years roll by, Who 


throughout eternity dost live and reign, one God with 
the Father and the Holy Spirit. R. Amen. 


Then shall be said (on New Year’s Day only) the Col- 


lect for Christmas. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the sixth chapter of that of 
St. Paul the Apostle to the Romans, beginning at the 
third verse. , 


KNOW ye not that so many of us as were baptized 
into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death? There- 
fore we are buried with Him by baptism into death; 
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the 


Paces * 





NEW YEAR’S DAY 35 





glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in 
newness of life. For if we have been planted together 
in the likeness of His death, we shall be also in the 
likeness of His resurrection; knowing this, that our 
old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin 
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not 
serve sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe 
that we shall also live with Him; knowing that Christ 
being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath 
‘no more dominion over Him. -For in that He died, He 
died unto sin once; but in that He liveth, He liveth 
unto God. Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be 
dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin therefore reign in 
your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts 
thereof. Neither yield ye your members as _ in- 
struments of unrighteousness unto sin; but yield your- 
selves unto God, as those that are alive from the 
dead, and your members as instruments of righteous- 
mess unto God. For the wages of sin is death; but 
the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. 





Here endeth the Epistle 


The Gospel 


| The holy Gospel is taken from the fifth chapter of that 
according to St. Matthew, beginning at the fourteenth 
verse. 


YE are the light of the world. Let your light so 
shine before men, that they may see your good works 
and glorify your Father Which is in heaven. But 
take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to 
ibe seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your 
i\Father Which is in heaven. Therefore when thou 
hloest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, 
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the 
streets, that they may have glory of men. Amen, I 
ay unto you, they have their reward. But when thou 
oest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right 
and doeth, that thine alms may be in secret; and thy 
| C2 



















36 THE EPIPHANY 


Father Which seeth in secret Himself shall reward — 
thee openly. Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon 
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves break through and steal; but lay up for 
yourselves treasures in’ heaven, where neither moth 
nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break 
through nor steal; for where your treasure is, there ~ 
will your heart be also. The light of the body is the 
eye; if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body 
shall be full of light. Be ye therefore perfect, even 
as your Father Which is in heaven is perfect. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
every day after, unto the Epiphany. 





Che Epiphany 
The Collect 


O GOD, Who by the leading of a star didst manifest 
our Lord to the Wise Men of old, we crave such zeal 
aed wisdom as may help us to guide longing souls to 
shee, Who art the Father of all. R. Amen, 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the twenty-first chapter of the Revelation 
of St. John the Divine, beginning at the third verse. 


BEHOLD, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He 
will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, 
and God Himself shall be with them, and be their God, 
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; 
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the 
former things are passed away. Behold, I make all 
things new. I will give unto him that is athirst of 
the fountain of the water of life freely. He that 
overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will be his 


THE HPIPHANY 37 


God and he shall be My son. Behold, I come quickly, 
and My reward is with Me, to give every man ac- 

> cording as his work shall be. I am Alpha and Omega, 
the beginning and the end, the first and the last. 
I am the root and offspring of David, and the bright 
and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, 
Come; and let him that heareth say, Come. And let 
him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him 
take the water of life freely. Surely I come quickly. 
Amen; even so, come, Lord Jesus. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the second chapter of 
that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the first 
verse. 


WHEN Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judza, in 
the days of Herod the King, behold, there came Wise 
Men from the East to Jerusalem, saying: Where is 
He that is born King of the Jews ? For we have 
seen His star in the Hast, and are come to worship 
Him. When Herod the King heard these things, he 
was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him; and when 
he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of 
the people together, he demanded of them where 
Christ should be born. And they said unto him: In 
Bethlehem of Judea; for thus it is written by the pro- 
phet: And thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, 
art not the least among the princes of Juda; for out 
of thee shall come a governor, that shall rule My 
people Israel. Then Herod, when he had privily 
‘called the Wise Men, inquired of them diligently what 
time the star appeared. And he sent them to Beth- 
lehem, and said: Go and search diligently for the 
young Child; and when ye have found Him, bring 
“me word again, that I may come and worship Him 
| also. When they had heard the King, they departed; 
and lo, the star which they had seen in the East went 
‘before them, till it came and stood over where the 


38 SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 


young Child was. And when they saw the star they 
rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And when they 
were come into the house they saw the young Child 
with Mary His mother, and fell down, and worshipped 
Him; and when they ~had opened their treasures, 
they presented unto Him gifts, gold and frankincense 
and myrrh. And being warned of God in a dream 
that they should not return to Herod, they departed 
into their own country another way. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve until 
the Baptism of Our Lord, or until the Second Sunday 
after the Epiphany, tf that should fall earlier than the 
Baptism. 


The Second Sunday after the 
Epiphany 


Intent: Fellowship 


The Collect 


O LORD Christ, we thank Thee that it hath pleased 
Thee to draw us into wondrous fellowship with Thee 
through Thy mystical body the Church, and we pray 
that all who profess and call themselves Christians 
may grow into the fullness of Thy love, and hold the 
faith in unity of spirit, in the bond of peace, and in 
righteousness of life, O Thou great King of Love, 
to Whom be praise and adoration from men and 
from the Angel host. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the first chapter of that of 
St. Paul the Apostle to the Colossians, beginning at 
the ninth verse. 


WE do not cease to pray for you, and to desire 
that ye might be filled with the knowledge of His will 





SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 39 





in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; that ye 
“might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, 
.being fruitful in every good work, and increasing 
in the knowledge of God; strengthened with all might, 
according to His glorious power, unto all patience 
and long-suffering with joyfulness; giving thanks 
unto the Father, Which hath made us meet to be 
-partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, 
Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, 
and hath translated us into the kingdom of His dear 
Son, Who is the image of the invisible God, the first- 
born of every creature. For by Him were all things 
created, that are in heaven and that are in earth, 
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or do- 
minions or principalities or powers: all things were 
created by Him, and for Him; and He is before all 
things, and by Him all things consist. And He is 
the head of the body, the Church, Who is the begin- 
ning, the first-born from the dead; that in all things 
He might have the pre-eminence, 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the seventh chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the 
second verse. 


NOW a certain centurion’s servant, who was very 
dear unto him, was sick and ready to die. And when 
‘he heard of Jesus, he sent unto Him the elders of the 
Jews, beseeching Him that He would come and heal 
his servent. And when they came to Jesus, they be- 
sought Him instantly, saying that he was worthy 
‘for whom He should do this: for he loveth our na- 
tion, and he hath built us a synagogue. Then Jesus 
went with them. And when He was now not far 
from the house, the centurion sent friends to Him, 
saying unto Him: Lord, trouble not Thyself; for I 
am not worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my 
roof (wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to 


le 
\e 


49 THIRD SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 





come unto Thee); but say in a word, and my servant 
shall be healed. For I also am a man set under 
authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto 
one: Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and 
he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth 
it. When Jesus heard these things, He marvelled at 
him, and turned Him about, and said unto the people 
that followed Him: I say unto you, I have not found 
so great faith; no, not in Israel. And they that were 
sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole 
that had been sick. 





Che Third Sunday after the 
Epiphany 


Intent: Sincerity and Control of Speech 


The Collect 


O LORD, Who didst unsparingly rebuke injustice 
and hypocrisy, we pray that we may be just and 
true of heart in all our dealings with ourselves and 
with our brethren, that we may live openly and 
without guile before Thee, O Thou great King of 
Righteousness, to Whom be praise for ever and ever. | 
R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the nineteenth chapter of the Book 
of Ecclesiasticus, beginning at the sixth verse. 


HE that can rule his tongue shall live without 
strife; and he that hateth babbling shall have less 
evil. Rehearse not unto another that which is told 
unto thee, and thou shalt fare never the worse. Whe- 
ther it be to friend or foe, talk not of other men’s 
lives; and if thou canst without offence, reveal them 
not. If thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee. 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 41 





Admonish a friend, it may be he hath not done it; 
and if he have done it, that he do it no more. Ad- 
monish thy friend, it may be he hath not said it; 
and if he have, that he speak it not again. Admonish 
a friend, for many times it is a slander; and believe 
not every tale. There is one that slippeth in his 
speech, but not from his heart; and who is he that 
hath not offended with his tongue? The knowledge 
of the commandments of the Lord is the doctrine of 
life; and they that do things that please Him shall 
receive the fruit of the tree of immortality; for to 
know Him is perfect righteousness, yea, to know His 
power is the root of immortality. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-third 
chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the twenty-third verse. 


WOE unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! 
for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have 
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, 
“mercy and faith; these ought ye to have done, and 
not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, 
| which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel, ye make 
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but 
within they are full of extortion and excess. Cleanse 
first that which is within the cup and platter, that 
‘the outside of them may be clean also, Ye are like 
‘unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beauti- 
ful outwardly, but within are full of dead men’s 
bones and of all uncleanness. Hven so ye outwardly 
appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of 
hypocrisy and iniquity. And He said unto His dis- 
ciples: Do not ye after their works; for they say 
and do not. All their works they do for to be seen 
of men; but whosoever shall exalt himself shall be 
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. 





42 FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 
hi I ei EE NA ee = 


The Haurth Sunday afier the 
Epiphany 


Intent: Endurance 


The Collect 


ALMIGHTY Father, we pray that we may bear 
within ourselves a calm and steadfast mind, that 
we may meet the blows of life with courage and with 
cheerfulness, and ever lift glad hearts to Thee, Who 
art the fullness of our joy, through Christ our Lord. 
R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
First Epistle General of St. Peter, beginning at the 
second verse. 


Grace unto you and peace be multiplied. Blessed 
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who 
according to His abundant mercy hath begotten us 
again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead to an inheritance incorruptible 
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in 
heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed 
in the last time. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though 
now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness 
through manifold temptations; that the trial of your 
faith, being much more precious than of gold that 
perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be 
found unto praise and honour and glory at the ap- 
pearing of Jesus Christ, Whom, having not seen, ye 
love; in Whom, though now ye see Him not, yet be- 
lieving, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory. For ye are a chosen generation, a royal priest- 
hood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should 
show forth the praise of Him Who hath called you 
out of darkness into His marvellous light. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 





a 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 43 
The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixteenth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the 
twentieth verse. 





AND Jesus said: Ye shall be sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into joy. A little while, and 
ye shall not see Me; and again a little while, and ye 
shall see Me. Ye now therefore have sorrow; but I 
will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and 
your joy no man taketh from you. Hitherto have ye 
asked nothing in My name; ask and ye shall receive, 
that your joy may be full. This is My command- 
ment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. 
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay 
down his life for his friends. Ye are My friends, 
if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I 
call you not servants, for the servant knoweth not 
what his lord doeth; but I have called you friends, 
for all things that I have heard of My Father I 
have made known unto you. These things I have 
spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in you, 
and that your joy might be full. 


Che Hitth Sunday after the 
Epiphany 


Intent: Steadfastness and Diligence 


The Collect 


LORD God, Whose never-ceasing watchfulness 
sweeteneth all the worlds, we crave for steadfastness, 
that we may eschew sloth, the sin which doth so easily 
beset us, and may constantly show diligence in Thy 
most holy service, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


44 FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 
The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the sixth chapter of that 
of St. Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews, beginning at 
the tenth verse. 





GOD is not unrighteous to forget your work and 
labour of love, which ye have showed toward His 
Name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and 
do minister. And we desire that every one of you 
do show the same diligence to the full assurance of 
hope unto the end, that ye be not slothful, but fol- 
lowers of them who through faith and patience in- 
herit the promises. Wherefore, seeing we are com- 
passed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let 
us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so 
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race 
which is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author 
and finisher of our faith. By Him, therefore, let us 
offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, the 
fruit of our lips giving thanks to His name. But to 
do good and to communicate forget not; for with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased. Wherefore lift up the 
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, and 
make straight the paths for your feet, lest that 
which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it 
be rather healed. Follow peace with all men, and 
holiness (without which no man shall see the Lord), 
looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of 
God. Now the God of peace make you perfect in 
every good work to do His will, working in you 
that which is well pleasing in His sight, through 
Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 
The Gospel 
The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fifth 


chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the fourteenth verse. 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 45 





_ THE kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling 

into a far country, who called his servants, and de- 

livered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave 
“five talents, to another two, and to another one; to 
every man according to his several ability; and 
straightway took his journey. Then he that had re- 
ceived the five talents went and traded with the 
same, and made them other five talents. And like- 
wise he that had received two, he also gained other 
two. But he that had received one went and digged 
in the earth, and hid his lord’s money. After a long 
time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth 
with them. And so he that had received five talents 
came and brought other five talents, saying: Lord, 
thou deliveredst unto me five talents; behold, I have 
gained beside them five talents more. His lord said 
unto him: Well done, thou good and faithful ser- 
vant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I 
will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou 
into the joy of thy.lord. He also that had received | 
two talents came and said: Lord, thou deliveredst 
unto me two talents; behold, J have gained 
two other talents beside them. His lord said unto 
him: Well done, good and faithful servant; thou 
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make 
thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy 
of thy lord. Then he which had received one talent 
came and said: Lord, I knew thee that thou art an 
hard man, and I was afraid, and went and hid thy 
talent in the earth; lo, there thou hast that is thine. 
But his lord answered and said unto him: Thou 
wicked and slothful servant, thou oughtest to have 
put my money to the exchangers, and then at my 
coming I should have received mine own with usury. 
Take therefore the talent from him and give it unto 
him which hath ten talents. For unto every one that 
hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; 
but from him that hath not shall be taken away even 
* that which he hath. 


46 SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY ( 


Che Sixth Sunday after the 
Epiphany 


Intent: Discrimination 


The Collect 


O GOD, forasmuch as in the changes and chances 
of this mortal life it must needs be that we meet 
with many and great temptations, grant that we may 
be wary to discern and strong to resist them, through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
General Epistle of St. James, beginning at the second 
verse. 


MY brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations; know this, that the trying of your 
faith worketh patience. But let patience have her 
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, 
wanting nothing. Blessed is the man that endureth 
temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the 
crown of life which the Lord hath promised to them 
that love Him. Let no man say when he is tempted: 
I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted by 
evil, neither tempteth He any man; but every man 
is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, 
and enticed. Do not err, my beloved brethren; every 

good gift.and every perfect gift is from above, and 
cometh down from the Father of Lights, with Whom 
is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 
The Gospel 
The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fourth 


chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the thirty-seventh verse. 


SEPTUAGESIMA — 47 


AS the days of Noah were, so shall the coming of 
the Son of Man be; for as in the days before the 
. flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giv- 
ing in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into 
the ark, and knew not until the flood came and took 
them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son 
of Man be. But of that day and that hour knoweth 
no man; no, not the Angels of heaven, but My Father 
only. Take ye heed, watch and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation, for ye know not when the time is. 
The Son of Man is as a man taking ‘a fax journey, 
who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, 
and to every man his work, and commanded the por- 
ter to watch. Watch ye therefore, lest coming sud- 
denly He find you sleeping. What I say unto you, 
I say unto. all: Watch. 





The Sunday called Sepiuagesima, or 
the thirh Sunday before Lent 


Intent: The Gift of Wisdom 


The Collect 


O GOD the Holy Ghost, pour out upon us, we pray 
_Thee, Thy wondrous gifts of wisdom and under- 
standing, that we through them may learn to love 
Thee more and serve Thee better, Who livest and 
reignest with the Father and the Son, One God for 
evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Bpistle 
is taken from the seventh chapter of the Book of 
the Wisdom of Solomon, beginning at the twenty- 
second verse. 


_ ‘WISDOM, which is the worker of all things, taught 
me; for in her is an understanding spirit, holy, one 


48 SEPTUAGESIMA 


only, manifold, subtle, lively, clear, undefiled, plain, 
not subject to hurt, loving the thing that is good, 
quick, which cannot be letted, ready to do good, 
kind to man, steadfast, sure, free from care, having 
all power, overseeing all things, and going through 
all spirits, understanding, pure and most subtle. For 
Wisdom is more moving than any motion; she passeth 
and goeth through all things by reason of her pure- 
ness. For she is the breath of the power of God, and 
a pure infiuence fiowing from the glory of the Al- 
mighty; therefore can no defiled thing flow into her. 
For she is the brightness of the everlasting light, 
the unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the 
image of His goodness. And, being but one, she can 
do all things; remaining in herself, she maketh all 
things new; and in all ages entering into holy souls, 
she maketh them friends of God, and prophets. For 
God loveth him that dwelleth with Wisdom. 
For she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all 
the order of the stars. Being compared with the 
light, she is found before it. He that loveth her 
loveth life, and they that seek her early shall be 
filled with joy. He that holdeth her fast shall in- 
herit glory; and wheresoever she entereth, the Lord 
will bless. They that serve her shall minister to the 
Holy One; and them that love her the Lord doth 
love. 
Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fifth 
chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the first verse. . 


THEN shall the kingdom of heaven be likened 
unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went 
forth to meet the bridegroom, And five of them were 
wise, and five were foolish. They that were foolish 
took their lamps, and took no oil with them; but 
the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. 
While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and 


SEXAGESIMA 49 





slept, And at mignight there was a cry made: Be- 
hold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. 
‘Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. 
And the foolish said unto the wise: Give us of your 
oil, for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answer- 
ed, saying: Not so; lest there be not enough for us 
and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy 
for yourselves. And while they went to buy, the 
bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in 
with him to the marriage; and the door was shut. 
Afterwards came also the other virgins, saying: Lord, 
Lord, open to us. But he answered and said: Amen, 
I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, 
for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein 
the Son of Man cometh. 





Che Sunday called Sexagesima, or 
the Second Sunday before Lent 
Intent: The HOLY SPIRIT as Sanctifier 


The Collect 


O GOD the Holy Ghost, we pray Thee to direct, 
sanctify and govern both our hearts and minds in 
the ways of Thy laws and in the works of Thy com- 
mandments: that through Thy most mighty protec- 
tion, both here and ever, we may be pure in body 
and in soul, through Christ our Lord, Who with Thee 
and the Father liveth and reigneth for ever. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the twelfth chapter of 
the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the first verse. 


CONCERNING spiritual gifts, brethren, I would 
not have you ignorant. There are diversities of 
gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences 


50 SEXAGESIMA 


nn nn LEE EEEE EEE EEEEEE ESSERE 


of administrations, but the same Lord. And there 
are diversities of operations, but it is the same God 
which worketh all in all. But the manifestation of 
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. 
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, 
to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; 
to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the 
gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the 
working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another 
discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of 
tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues; 
put all these worketh that one and the self-same 
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twelfth chapter 
of that according to St. Mark, beginning at the 
twenty-eighth verse. 


ONE of the scribes came and asked Jesus: Which 
is the first commandment of all? And Jesus answer- 
ed him: The first of all the commandments is: Hear, O 
Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord; and thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all 
thy strength; this is the first commandment, and the 
second is like unto it, namely, this: Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other com- 
mandment greater than these. And the scribe said 
unto Him: Well, Master, Thou hast said the truth; 
for there is one God, and there is none other but 
He; and to love Him with all the heart, and with 
all the understanding and with all the soul, and with 
all the strength, and to love his neighbour as him- 
self, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sac- 
rifices. And when Jesus saw that he answered dis- 
creetly, He said unto him: Thou art not far from 
the kingdom of God. 


QUINQUAGESIMA 51 


The Sunday called Ouingquagesina, or 
the next Sunday before Lent 
Intent: The HOLY SPIRIT: as the Fire of Love 


The Collect 


O HOLY Spirit, Who hast taught us that all our 
doings without love are nothing worth, pour into 
our hearts that most excellent gift of love, the very 
bond of peace, and of all virtues, without which who- 
soever liveth is counted dead before Thee, Who livest 
and reignest with the Father and the Son, one God 
for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the thirteenth chapter 
of the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians, beginning at the first verse. 


THOUGH I speak with the tongues of men and 
of Angels, and have not love, I am become as sound- 
ing brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have 
the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, 
and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that 
I could remove mountains, and have not love, I am 
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed 
the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, 
and have not love, it profiteth me nothing. Love 
suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; love 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not be- 
have itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not 
easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in 
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, 
believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all 
things. Love never faileth; .but whether there be 
prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, 
they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it 
shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we 
prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect 


52 QUINQUAGESIMA 


Oe 
is come, then that which is in part shall be done 
away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I 
understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when 
I became a man, I put away childish things. For 
now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face 
to face; now I know in part, but then shall I know 
even as I am known. And now abideth faith, hope, 
love, these three; but the greatest of these is love. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twentieth chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
first verse. 


THE kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that 
is an householder, which went out early in the morn- 
ing to hire labourers into his vineyard. And when 
he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, 
he sent them into his vineyard. And he went out 
about the third hour, and saw others standing idle 
in the marketplace, and said unto them: Go ye also 
into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will 
give you. And they went their way. Again he went 
out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. 
And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found 
others standing idle, and saith unto them: Why 
stand ye here all the day idle? They say unto him: 
Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them: 
Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, 
that shall ye receive. So when even was come, the 
lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward: Call 
the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning 
from the last unto the first. And when they came that 
were hired about the eleventh hour, they received 
every man a penny. But when the first came, they 
supposed that they should have received more; and 
they likewise received every man a penny. And when 
they had received it, they murmured against the 
goodman of the house, saying: These last have 





FIRST DAY OF LENT 53 





wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal 
unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of 
the day. But he answered one of them, and said: 
Friend, I do thee no wrong; didst not thou agree 
with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go thy 
way; I will give unto this last even as unto thee. 
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine 
own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? So 
the last shall be first, and the first last; for many 
be called, but few chosen. 


This Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve until the 
First Day of Lent. 


Che Hirst Day of Lent, 
anriently called Ash-Weduesday 


The Collect 


PREVENT us, O Lord, in all our doings with Thy 
most gracious favour, and further us with Thy con- 
tinual help, that in all our works, begun, continued 
and ended in Thee, we may glorify Thy holy Name, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


This Collect is to be said every day in Lent, after 
the Collect appointed for the Day. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the third chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the nineteenth verse. 


REPENT ye therefore, and be converted, that your 
sins may be blotted out when the times of refresh- 
ing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And 
He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preach- 
ed unto you; Whom the heaven must receive until 
the times of restitution of all things, which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets since 


54 ‘ FIRST DAY OF LENT 


OF 
the world began. For Moses truly said unto the 
fathers: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise 
up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall 
ye hear in all things whatsoever He shall say unto 
you. Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel, and 
those that follow after, as many as have spoken, 
have likewise foretold of these days. Ye are the 
children of the prophets, and of the covenant which 
God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham: 
And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth 
be blessed. Unto you first, God, having raised up 
His Son Jesus, sent Him to bless you, in turning away 
every one of you from his iniquities. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the third chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the third 
verse. 


JESUS said unto Nicodemus: Amen, I say unto 
thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God. Nicodemus said unto Him: How 
can a man be born when he is old? And Jesus an- 
swered: Amen, Amen, I say unto thee, except a 
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born 
of the fiesh is flesh, and that which is born of the 
Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, 
ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where 
it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but 
canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth; 
so is everyone that is born of the Spirit. Nicodemus 
said; How can these things be? Jesus answered: 
Amen, Amen, I say unto thee, we speak that we do 
know, and testify that we have seen; and ye receive 
not our witness. If I have told you earthly things, 
and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you 
of heavenly things? And no man hath ascended up 
to heaven but He that came down from heaven, even 


FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 55 





the Son of Man which is in heaven. And as Moses 
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must 
the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him should not perish, but have eternal 
life. 

The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
every day after, unto the next Sunday. 





Che Hirst Sunday in Lent 


Intent: Self-Examination 


The Collect 


O LORD, Who for our solace hast appointed divers 
seasons unto Thy Church, grant us so justly to ex- 
amine ourselves that, discerning clearly our faults, 
we may truly amend them, and thus prepare our- 
selves fitly to celebrate Thy holy Feast of Easter, 
O risen Lord; unto Whom be praise and adoration 
for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fifth chapter of the 
Second Epistle of St. Paul. the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the ninth verse. 


WE labour that we may be accepted of Him, for 
we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, 
that every one may receive the things done in his 
body, according to that he hath done, whether it be 
good or bad. The love of Christ constraineth us; 
therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new crea- 
ture; old things are passed away; behold, all things 
are become new. Give no offence in anything, in all 
things approving yourselves by pureness, by know- 
ledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy 
Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by 
the power of God, by the armour of righteousness on 


56 SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 


the right hand and on the left. Examine yourselves, 
whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. 
Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live 
in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with 
you. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the third chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the six- 
teenth verse. oe 


GOD so loved the world that He gave His alone-born 
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life. For God sent not His Son 
into the world to condemn the world, but that the 
world through Him might be saved. He that 
believeth on Him is not condemned; but he that be- 
lieveth not is condemned already, because he hath 
not believed in the Name of the alone-born Son of 
God. And this is the condemnation, that light is 
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather 
than light, because their deeds were evil. For every- 
one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh 
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But 
he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds 
may be made manifest, that they are wrought in 
God. 


Che Serund Sunday in Lent 
Intent: Control of Speech 


The Collect 


© GOD, Who unto man alone hast given the power 
of speech wherewith to praise Thee, grant that our 
hearts may be so filled with love and wisdom that 
we may speak evil of no man, but evermore glorify 
Thy holy Name, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 57 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the third chapter of the 
Epistle General of St. James, beginning at the second 
verse. 





IF any man offend not in word, the same is a 
perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body. For 
every kind of beasts and of birds, and of serpents 
and of things in the sea, hath been tamed of man- 
kind; but the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly 
evil, full of deadly poison. The tongue is a little 
member, but it boasteth great things. Behold, how 
great a matter a little fire kindleth! And the tongue 
is a fire, a world of iniquity; so is the tongue among 
our members that it defileth the whole body, and 
setteth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on 
fire of hell. Therewith bless we God, even the Father, 
and therewith curse we men, who are made after the 
similitude of God. Out of the same mouth proceed- 
eth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things 
ought not so to be. If any man among you seem to 
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but de- 
ceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion is vain. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixth chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the 
forty-first verse. 


WHY beholdest thou the mote that is in thy bro- 
ther’s eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in 
thine own eye ? How canst thou say to thy brother: 
Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine 
eye; when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that 
is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first 
the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou 
see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother’s 
eye. For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt 


58 THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 


SAS a pema SN  a 
fruit; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good 
fruit. For every tree is known by his own fruit; 
for of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble- 
push gather they grapes. A good man out of the 
good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which 
is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of 
his heart bringeth forth that which is evil; for of 
the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh. 





Che Third Sunday in Lent 


Intent: Understanding 


The Collect 


O GOD Who knowest all things, and art therefore 
all-forgiving, grant us grace so to look upon the 
hearts of our brethren that we may never fail in 
understanding and compassion, through Christ the 
Lord of love, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and 
the Holy Ghost, ever one God, throughout all ages of 
ages. R. Amen, 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the third chapter of the 
First Epistle General of St. Peter, beginning at the 
eighth verse. 


BE ye all of one mind, having compassion one on 
another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous; 
not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, 
but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are there- 
unto called, that ye should inherit a blessing. For 
he that will love life and see good days, let him 
refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak 
no guile. Let him eschew evil and do good; let him 
seek peace, and ensue it. And above all things have 
fervent charity among yourselves; for charity shall 
cover the multitude of sins. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 59 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eighth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the third 
verse. 





THE Pharisees brought unto Jesus a2 woman who 
had been unfaithful to her husband, and when they 
had set her in the midst, they said unto Him: Master, 
this woman was taken in impurity, in the very act; 
now Moses in the Law commanded us that such should 
be stoned; but what sayest Thou ? This they said, 
tempting Him, that they might have wherewith to 
accuse Him. But Jesus stooped down, and with His 
finger wrote on the ground, as though He heard them 
not. So when they continued asking Him, He lifted 
Himself up, and said unto them: He that is without 
sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. And 
again He stooped down and wrote on the ground. 
And they who heard it, being convicted by their own 
conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the 
eldest, even unto the last; and Jesus was left alone, 
and the woman standing in the midst. When Jesus 
had lifted Himself up, and saw none but the woman, 
He said unto her: Woman, where are those thine 
accusers ? Hath no man condemned thee? She said: 
No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her: Neither do 
I condemn thee; go, and sin no more. 


Che Hourth Sunday in Lent, ur 
Refreshment Sunday 


Intent: Spiritual Refreshment 


The Collect 


ALMIGHTY God, Who art unto Thy people a Foun- 
tain of Wisdom, a Tower of Strength, and an ever- 
shining Sun of Beauty and Harmony, grant that we 
may so prepare ourselves to celebrate the sacred mys- 


60 FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 





teries of the Passion and the Resurrection that we may 
ever be refreshed by the continual outpouring of Thy 
power from on high, through Christ our Lord. R. 
Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of 
that of St. Paul the Apostle to the Philippians, be- 
ginning at the eleventh verse. 


I HAVE learned, in whatsoever state I am, there- 
with to be content. I know both how to be abased, 
and I know how to abound; everywhere and in all 
things I am instructed both to be full and to be 
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. I can do 
all things through Christ Who strengtheneth me. 
Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatso- 
ever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report: if there be 
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these 
things. Those things, which ye have both learned, 
and received, and heard, and seen in me, do; and the 
God of peace shall be with you. Rejoice in the Lord 
alway; and again I say, Rejoice. Let your moderation 
be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand, and 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding 
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ 
Jesus. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the third 
verse. 


JESUS went up into a mountain, and there He sat 
with His disciples. And when He lifted up His eyes, 
and saw a great company come unto Him, He saith 
unto Philip: Whence shall we buy bread, that these 
may eat? Philip answered: Two hundred penny- 


FIFTH SUNDAY IN LENT 61 





worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every 
one of them may take a little. One of His disciples, 
Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, saith unto Him: There 
is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two 
small fishes; but what are they among so many ? 
Jesus said: Make the men sit down. Now there was 
much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in 
number about five thousand. And Jesus took the 
loaves; and when He had given thanks, He distri- 
buted to the disciples, and the disciples to them that 
were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much as 
they would. When they were filled, he said unto 
His disciples: Gather up the fragments that remain, 
that nothing be lost. Therefore they gathered them 
together, and filled twelve baskets with the frag- 
ments of the five barley loaves which remained over 
and above unto them that had eaten. Then those 
men, when they had seen this miracle which Jesus 
did, said: This is of a truth that prophet which 
should come into the world. 


Che Hitth Sunday in Lent, or 
Passion Sunday 
Intent: Humility 


The Altar Cross is veiled in violet gauze. 


The Collect 


O LORD, Who didst lay aside Thy glory, and take 
upon Thee the earthly robe of mortal flesh, we pray 
for wisdom to avoid the specious snare of pride, and 
ever to walk humbly and heedfully in Thy sight, 
Who livest and reignest with the Father and the 
Holy Ghost throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 
The Epistle is taken from the twelfth chapter of 





62 FIFTH SUNDAY IN LENT 





that of St. Paul the Apostle to the Romans, begin- 
ning at the second verse. 


BE not conformed to this world, but be ye trans- 
formed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may 
prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect 
will of God. For I say to every man that is among 
you not to think of himself more highly than he 
ought to think, but to think soberly according as 
God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. 
For as we have many members in one body, and all 
members have not the same office, so we, being many, 
are one body in Christ, and every one members one of 
another. Having then gifts differing according to 
the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let 
us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; or 
ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or he that 
teacheth, on teaching, or he that exhorteth, on ex- 
hortation. He that giveth, let him do it with sim- 
plicity; -he that ruleth, with diligence; he that showeth 
mercy, with cheerfulness. Dearly beloved, avenge 
not yourselves, for it is written: Vengeance is Mine, 
I will repay, saith the Lord. Therefore if thine 
enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him 
drink; in so doing, thou shalt heap coals of fire upon 
his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil 
with good. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eighteenth chap- 
ter of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the 
ninth verse. 


HE spake this parable unto certain which trusted 
in themselves that they were righteous, and despised 
others: Two men went up into the temple to pray; 
the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The 
Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself: God, 
I thank Thee that I am not as other men are, extor- 
tioners, unjust, or even as this publican. I fast 


PALM SUNDAY 63 





- twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. 
And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift 
up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon 
* his breast, saying: God be merciful to me, a sinner. 
I tell you, this man went down to his house justified 
rather than the other; for every one that exalteth 
himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth him- 
self shall be exalted. And they brought unto Him 
also infants, that He should touch them; but when 
His disciples saw it, they rebuked them. But Jesus 
called them unto Him, and said: Suffer little children 
to come unto Me, and forbid them not; for of such 
is the kingdom of God. Amen, I say unto you: Who- 
soever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little 
child shall in no wise enter therein. 


Che Sunday Next before Easter, or 
Palm Sunday 


The Blessing of the Palms 


The procession enters as usual. Upon reaching the 
chancel the palm branches upon the table are uncover- 
ed. The antiphon ‘‘Hosanna Filio David’’ is then 
sung, as followeth: 


Priest. Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed 
is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord. 


People. O King of Israel: Hosanna in the highest. 


The Priest sprinkles the palms thrice with holy water 
and says: 


Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 





64 PALM SUNDAY 


O God, Who gatherest the things that are dispersed, 
and preservest what is gathered; Thou that didst 
bless the people, who, bearing branches, went out 
to meet Jesus; do Thou also + purify and + bless 
these boughs of palm which Thy servants faithfully 
take up in honour of Thy Name, that unto what place 
soever these branches be brought, the dwellers there- 
in may obtain Thy blessing, and, every adversity 
being chased therefrom, Thy right Hand may pro- 
tect those whom Thy Son Christ doth watch over 
and love. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The people are seated. 


The Priest blesses incense and censes the palms thrice. 
He then turns to the people and says: 


Receive a branch of palm, ye who desire to greet 
the Lord with joy and gladness. 


The branches are now distributed to the clergy and 
the people; a branch is fastened to the top of the pro- 
cessional cross. The procession forms in the chancel 
and the Priest sings: 


P. Let us go forth in peace. 
Cc. In the Name of Christ. s 


The procession moves through the church and out of 
the door singing an appropriate hymn.* The door is 
closed at the end of the hymn, and the people within 
turn in tts direction and sing the first verse of ‘‘ All 
glory, laud, and honour.’’ This verse is repeated by 
those without the door. The people and choir 
then sing the neat verse, and those on the outside re- 
peat the refrain, which is the same as the first verse. 
This ts done alternately throughout the whole of the 
verses, all, however, joining in the refrain after the 
last verse. The cross-bearer then knocks at the church 
door with the base of the processional cross; the door 
is immediately opened, and the procession enters singing 
some appropriate hymn. The Holy Hucharist now be- 
gins as usual. 


* Hymn 132 is suitable. 





PALM SUNDAY — 65 


The Collect 

O LORD Christ, before Whom in Thy one earthly 
triumph the children of the Hebrews did cast their 
votive palms, grant unto Thy faithful servants that 
in Thine own good time we too may bear the palm 
of victory, and may be found worthy to stand in Thy» 
holy Presence, Thou Who dwellest ever in the unity 
of the Father and the Holy Spirit throughout all 
ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation 
ef St. John the Divine, beginning at the first verse. 


I HEARD a great voice of much people in heaven 
saying: Alleluia; salvation and glory and honour 
and power unto the Lord our God, for true and right- 
eous are His judgments. And again they said Al- 
leluia. And the four-and-twenty elders and the four 
beasts fell down and worshipped God that sat on the 
Throne, saying: Amen, Alleluia; and a voice came 
out of the Throne saying: Praise our God, all ye 
His servants and ye that love Him, both small and 
sreat. And I heard as it were the voice of a great 
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, -and 
as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying: Alleluia; 
for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth: let us be glad 
und rejoice and give honour to Him. And I saw heaven 
ypened, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon 
him was called Faithful and True. His eyes were 
us a flame of fire, and on His Head were many crowns; 
4nd His name is called The Word of God; and He hath 
yn His vesture and on His thigh a name written: King 
9f Kings and Lord of Lords. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 
The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-first chap- 
fer of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
first verse. 





D 





66 HOLY WEEK SERVICES. 





WHEN they drew nigh unto Jerusalem and were | 
come to Bethphage unto the Mount of Olives, then | 
sent Jesus two disciples, saying unto them: Go unto — 
the village over against you, and straightway ye | 
shall find an ass tied and a colt with her; loose them — 
and bring them unto Me. And if any man say ~ 
aught unto you, ye shall say: The Lord hath need | 
of them; and straightway he will send them. And 
the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, | 
and brought the ass and the colt, and put on them — 
their clothes, and they set Him thereon. And a very — 
great multitude spread their garments in the way; 
others cut down branches from the trees and strewed — 
them in the way. And the multitude that went be- 
fore and that followed cried saying: Hosanna to 
the Son of David: Blessed is He that cometh in the 
Name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. And 
when He was come into Jerusalem all the city was 
moved saying: Who is this? And the multitude 
said: This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth in Gali- 
lee. 





The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
every day until Maundy Thursday. 


NOTE ON HOLY WEEK SERVICES | 


The traditional services at the conclusion of Holy 
Week, in which the successive events in the mystery- 
drama of the Gospels from Thursday to Easter Sunday 
are portrayed, are an interesting survival of primitive 
rites of the Church. 


Maundy Thursday takes its name from the opening 
words of the antiphon Mandatum novum do vobis 
(‘fa new commandment I give unto you’’), which in- 
troduces the ancient ceremony of the washing of the © 
feet. Apart from this ceremony, which is not observed 
among us, the day is kept in honour of the institution 
of the Holy Eucharist, and the Celebration is one of 
festal splendour, with procession of the Blessed Sacra- 
ment. On this day also the Bishop, in his cathedral 


HOLY WEEK SERVICES 67 





church, consecrates the Holy Oils to be used for the 
succeeding year. 


. On Good Friday the Church commemorates the solemn 
event of the crucifixion in the mystery-drama. From 
the evening of Maundy Thursday the church is stripped 
of earthly pomp and splendour, and there is no Cele- 
bration until that of the Resurrection on Easter morn- 
ing. Instead, on Friday and Saturday there is cele- 
brated the Eucharist of the Presanctified, in which the 
consecration is omitted, the Priest receiving a Host 
consecrated or ‘‘presanctified’’ on Maundy Thursday. 


The traditional offices of this and the following day 
are protracted by the reading of long passages from the 
Old Testament, but these are not part of our rite. In 
the Eastern Church a Mass of the Presanctified is en- 
joined for all days in Lent, except Saturdays and Sun- 
days. 


In ancient times the people spent the night before 
Baster in prayer and watching. During this night the 
water in the baptismal font was blessed and catechu- 
mens were baptized in readiness to share in the Cele- 
bration of the Resurrection at dawn. In preparation 
for all this, long discourses and scripture readings were 
given for the edification of the faithful. Part of the 
symbolism, also, was the blessing of the new fire, and 
the lighting therefrom of the paschal candle and the 
lamps of the church. During the middle ages a ten- 
dency to anticipate liturgical events came increasingly 
and irresistibly into evidence, and now the Roman 
Catholic Church celebrates the Mass of Resurrection, 
‘as well as the blessing of the new fire and of the bap- 
tismal font, on the Saturday morning. 


The Liberal Catholic rite has reverted to the older 
and surely sounder usage of not celebrating the Hucharist 
of the Resurrection until Easter morning. 


° 





68 MAUNDY THURSDAY 


Maundy Chursday 


White: vestments are used, and the purple veil cov- 
ering the cross during Holy Week is replaced by one of | 
white. 


The Collect 


O GOD, Who in this wonderful Sacrament hast left 
us a perpetual memorial of Thy love; may we, by the 
inspiration of Thy Holy Spirit, so reverence the sacred 
mysteries of Thy Body and Blood, that we may the _ 
more worthily receive this Thy most glorious gift and 
blessing. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the eleventh chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corinth- 
ians, beginning at the twenty-third verse. 


FOR I have received of the Lord that which also I 
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same 
night in which He was betrayed, took bread, and when 
He had given thanks, He brake it, and said: Take, 
eat; this is My Body, which is broken for you; this 
do in remembrance of Me. After the same manner 
also He took the cup, when He had supped, saying: 
This cup is the new testament in My Blood; this do 
ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of Me. For 
as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, 
ye do show the Lord’s death till He come. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 4 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixth chapter of 
that according to St. John, beginning at the forty- 
seventh verse. 


AMEN, Amen, I say unto you, he that believeth 
on Me hath everlasting life. I am that Bread of 


MAUNDY THURSDAY 69 





life. This is the Bread which cometh down from 
heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. I 
am the living Bread which came down from heaven; 
if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: 
and the Bread that I will give is My Flesh, which I 
will give for the life of the world. ‘The Jews ~ 
therefore strove among themselves, saying: How can 
this man give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said 
unto them: Amen, Amen, I say unto you, except ye 
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His Blood, 
ye have no life in you; whoso eateth My Flesh and 
drinketh My Blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise 
him up at the last day. For My Flesh is meat indeed, 
and My Blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My 
Flesh, and drinketh My Blood, dwelleth in Me, and I 
in him. As the living Father hath sent Me, and I 
live by the Father; so he that eateth Me even he 
shall live by Me. This is that Bread which came down 
from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and 
are dead: he that eateth of this Bread shall live for 
ever. 

Four large Hosts are consecrated, one for this Cele- 
bration, the other three for subsequent use. 





During the singing of the Adeste Fideles, the Blessed 
Sacrament is carried round the church in procession in 
the monstrance. 


If this hymn be not long enough, tt should be sup- 
plemented by some. other Eucharistic hymn. 





At evening a ciborium containing the three Hosts is 
carried out, in solemn procession if there be an evening 
service. These, together with some Particles for pos- 
sible use of the sick, should be reserved in a taber- 
nacle in the sacristy or some other convenient place out 
of the church. Two of these Hosts are required for 
the Masses of the Presanctified on Good Friday and 
Holy Saturday respectively, and the third is to be placed 
in the tabernacle of the high Altar before the first 


eae GOOD FRIDAY 





Celebration on Easter Day, or on Saturday evening, if 
the first Vespers of Easter and Benediction be celebrated. 


After the evening service the Altars are stripped of — 
flowers, cloths and frontals, the tabernacle door left 
open, and the cross again veiled in violet. 





The Office of Blessing the Oils on Maundy Thursday 
will be found later in this Book. 





Gond Friday 


The Altar is covered with a plain linen cloth and 
violet frontal, but otherwise unadorned. No candles 
are lighted. If convenient, Prime may be sung before 
the special service of the Day. If that be done the lec- 
tions which follow shall be used as the First and Sec- 
ond Lessons at Prime in place of the Epistle and Gos- 
pel. 


The First Lesson. 


The First Lesson is taken from the fifty-eighth 
Chapter of the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, beginning 
at the third verse. 


Wherefore have we fasted, men say, and Thou 
seeest not ? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and 
Thou takest no knowledge? Is it such a fast that I 
have chosen? saith the Lord. A day for a man to 
afflict his soul, to bow down his head as a bulrush, 
and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt 
thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the 
Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen—to 
loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy 
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye 
break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to 
the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast 
out to thine house, and when thou seest the naked 


GOOD FRIDAY 71 


that thou cover him? ‘Then shall thy light break 
forth as the morning and thy health shall spring forth 
speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee; 
and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. 


Here endeth the First Lesson. 


The Second Lesson. 


. The Second Lesson is taken from the twelfth Chap- 
ter of the Gospel according to St. John, beginning at 
the twenty-third verse. 

Jesus said: The hour is come that the Son of Man 
should be glorified. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, 
except a grain of wheat fall into the ground and die 
it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much 
fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it, and he 
that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto 
life eternal. If any man serve Me, let him follow Me; 
and where I am, there shall also My servant be. 


Here endeth the Second Lesson. 
EUCHARIST OF THE PRESANCTIFIED. 
The Collect 


LORD Christ, Whose life Thy Church doth lay be- 
fore us as a perfect ensample for our imitation, grant 
us that we may have strength soto follow Thee through 
suffering and mystical death, that we may rise with 
Thee into the ineffable splendour of Easter, Who liv- 
est and reignest throughout the ages of ages. R. 
Amen. 


The Collects for Ash Wednesday and for Peace are 
then said, and the Epistle and Gospel follow in the usual 
form. 

The Epistle 


The Hpistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
Second Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the third verse. 


72 GOOD FRIDAY 


BLESSED be God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all 
comfort, Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that 
we may be able to comfort them which are in any 
trouble by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are 
comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by | 
Christ. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your conso- 
lation and salvation, which is effectual in the endur- 
ing of the same sufferings which we also suffer; or 
whether we be comforted, that also is for your conso- 
lation and salvation. And our hope of you is stead- 
fast, knowing that as ye are partakers of the suffer- 
ings, so shall ye be also of the consolation. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the ninth chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the eight- 
eenth verse. 


AND Jesus asked His disciples: Whom say the people 
that Iam? They answering said: John the Baptist; 
but some say Elias; and others say that one of the old 
prophets is risen again. He said unto them: But 
whom say ye that I am? Peter answering said: The 
Christ of God. And He straitly charged them, and com- 
manded them to tell to no man that thing, saying: The 
Son of Man must suffer many things, and be re- 
jected by the elders and chief priests and Scribes, and © 
be slain, and be raised the third day. And He said 
to them all: If any man will come after Me, let him 
deny himself and take up his cross daily, and follow 
Me. For whosoever doth not bear his cross and come 
after Me, cannot be My disciple. Likewise, whoso- 
ever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, | 
he cannot be My disciple. For whosoever will save 
his life shall lose it; but whosoever will lose his life 
for My sake, the same shall save it. 


The sermon, if there is to be one, follows here. 





GOOD FRIDAY 73 
_ The Priest (or deacon) now places the cross upon the 
centre of the Altar, and as it is unveiled the people kneel. 
The. officiant, other clergy and ministers approach the 
Altar from the farther end of the sanctuary or chancel by 
three stages; at the end of each stage they genu- 
flect. During the first genuflection the following ver- 
Sicle* and response are sung: 


P. Holy art Thou, O God. 

C. Holy art Thou, O God. 
During the second genuflection: 

P. Holy art Thou, O Mighty One. 
C. Holy art thou, O Mighty One. 
During the third genuflection: 


_ RP. Holy art Thou, O Immortal One; pour out. 
Thy love upon us, 

C. Holy art Thou, O Immortal One; pour out Thy 
love upon us. 

| This last genuflection having taken place, the follow- 
img hymn is sung: 

| 

_ *These phrases are a translation of the ancient Tris- 
agion (‘‘thrice-holy’’) of the Greek Liturgy. In the 
traditional Latin rite these Greek and Latin phrases 
are sung antiphonally, as follows: 


Hagios O Theos. 

Sanctus Deus. 

Hagios Ischyros. 

Sanctus Fortis. 

Hagios Athanatos, eleison hemas. 
Sanctus Immortalis, miserere nobis. 








Apart from the Kyrie eleison, this is the only in- 
stance of the use of Greek in the Roman rite. Greek 
was the original liturgical language at Rome, and 
Greck and Latin are the two ancient liturgical lan- 
guages of the Church. 





74 GOOD FRIDAY 


TAKE up thy cross, our Master said, 
If thou would’st My disciple be; 
Deny thyself, the world forsake, 
And humbly follow after Me. 


Take up thy cross; let not its weight 
Fill thy weak spirit with alarm; 

His strength shall bear thy spirit up, 
And brace thy heart, and nerve thine arm. 


Take up thy cross, nor heed the shame, 
Nor let thy foolish pride rebel; 

Thy Lord for thee the cross endured, 
To save thy soul from death’s dark spell. 


Take up thy cross, and follow Christ, 
Nor think till death to lay it down; 
For only he who bears the cross 
May hope to wear the glorious crown. 


To Thee, great Lord, the One in Three, 
All praise for evermore ascend; 
O grant us in our Home to see 
The heavenly life that knows no end. Amen. 


Towards the end. of the hymn the candles are lighted 
on the Altar, and lastly the cross is moved back to tts 
accustomed place. A procession is formed, and 
returns with lights and incense to the high Altar, the 
celebrant bearing a ciborium containing a Host con- 
secrated on the previous day. The Host is placed on 
the corporal; wine and water are poured into the chal- 
ice, but without the usual prayers. The Priest censes 
the offerings and the Altar in the usual way. Having 
washed his fingers im silence, he says: 


ORATE FRATRES. 


Brethren, pray that my sacrifice and yours may 
be acceptable to God the Father Almighty. 


a re ee 


GOOD FRIDAY 75 





_ C. May the Lord receive the sacrifice at thy hands, 
and sanctify our lives in His service, 


He continues: 


O Lord, we offer and present unto Thee ourselves, 
our souls and bodies, to be a holy and continual sac- 
rifice unto Thee. May our strength be spent in Thy 
service and our love poured forth upon Thy people. 
R. Amen. 


The Priest proceeds wmmediately to the following 
prayers: 

P. We praise and thank Thee, holy Lord, for the 
glory of Thy saints, and we (here he makes the sign 
of the holy cross with the paten from his forehead to 
his breast) join with them in worship before Thy great 
white throne, whence flow all love and light and bless- 
ing through all the worlds which Thou hast made. 


He elevates the Host for the adoration of the people. 
Immediately he breaks the Host over the chalice in the 
usual way, dropping the Particle into the chalice, but 
in silence. He then says: 


- O Thou Who in this adorable Sacrament hast left 
us a living memorial and pledge of Thy marvellous 
love for mankind, and dost therein graciously draw 
us into wondrous and mystic communion with Thee; 
grant us so to receive the sacred mysteries of Thy 
Body and Blood that our souls may be lifted into the 
immensity of Thy love, and that, being filled with a 
high endeavour, we may ever be mindful of Thine 
indwelling Presence and breathe forth the fragrance 
of a holy life. BR. Amen. 
Ihe Priest consumes the sacred Host in the usual 
manner, after which in silence he recewes the contents 
of the chalice. 
- He concludes with the following Postcommunio 
prayer : - 

We pray Thee, O Lord, that Thy grace may he 
so grafted inwardly in our hearts, that it-may con- 


76 HOLY SATURDAY 


tinually be made manifest in our lives. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Altar cloth is removed. 





At evening Complin may be said. 





Goly Saturday 


The Altar is covered with a plain linen cloth and 
violet frontal, but otherwise unadorned. No candles 
are yet lighted. The colour is violet. 

If convenient, Prime may be sung before the special 
service of the Day. If that be done, the lections which 
follow shall be used as the First and Second Lessons 
at Prime in place of the Epistle and Gospel. 


The First Lesson. 


The First Lesson is taken from the thirty-seventh 
Psalm of King David, beginning at the third verse. 


Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good: 
delight thou in the Lord, and He shall give thee thy 
heart’s desire. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and 
put thy trust in Him, and He shall bring it to pass. 
He shall make thy righteousness as clear as the light, 
and thy just dealing as the noonday. O rest in the 
Lord; wait patiently for Him; for the meek shall in- 
herit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the 
abundance of peace. : 


Here endeth the First Lesson. 
The Second Lesson. 


The Second Lesson is taken from the fourteenth 
Chapter of the Gospel according to St. John, begin- 
ning at the first verse. 


Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, 
believe also in Me. In My Father’s house are many 
mansions; if it were not so I would have told you. I 
go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and pre- 





eS ee 


HOLY SATURDAY 77 


pare a place for you, I will come again and receive 
you unto Myself, that where I am there ye may be 
‘also. Now, I have told you before it come to pass, 
that when it is come to pass ye might believe. Peace 
I leave with you, My peace I give unto you; not as 
the world giveth give I unto you. Let not your 
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. 


Here endeth the Second Lesson. 
THE BLESSING OF THE FIRE. 


At a convenient time before the service fire is kind- 
led outside the Church. It is desirable that the tin- 
der from which this fire is ignited should be lighted 
from the sun by means of a lens, but if that be not 
possible, flint and steel should be used. 


The service begins with the Asperges. Then a pro- 
cession is formed which moves to the door of the 
Church. The glowing embers are placed in an 
appropriate vessel, such as an open thurible, The Priest 
blesses the new fire in this wise: 


Let this fire be + purified and + blessed by Him 
in Whose honour it is kindled. 


Some charcoal for burning incense is lighted from 
the new fire and placed im another thurible. 


Five pellets of incense are blessed. 


P. Let this incense be + purified and + blessed 
by Him to Whom its fragrance is dedicated. 


The triple candle is lighted from the new fire and 
blessed. 


P. Let this candle be + purified and + blessed 
by Him Who is the Light of the world. 


- The procession returns. If there be a subdeacon 
and deacon, the former bears the five grains of incense. 
The deacon, who in the meantime has been vested in 
a white dalmatic, bears the triple candle, lighted from 





78 HOLY SATURDAY 


the new fire. Otherwise an attendant bears the in- 
cense, and the Priest takes the candle. During the pro- — 
cession four genuflections are made by all who take 
part therein. At each the deacon raises the triple 
candle and sings: 


Deacon. Christ is our Light. 
Cc. May His Light shine in our hearts. 


The procession having arrived at the Altar, the 
deacon says: 


Cleanse my heart and my lips, O God, Who by the 
hand of Thy Seraph didst cleanse the lips of the 
prophet Isaiah with a burning coal from Thine Altar, 
and in Thy lovingkindness so purify me that I may 
worthily proclaim Thy holy gospel. Through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Priest blesses him in the usual manner: 

May the Lord be in thy + heart and on thy + 
lips, that through thy heart the love of God may shine 
forth, and through thy lips His power be made mani- 
fest. R. Amen. 


D. The Lord be with you. 


Cc. And with thy spirit. 


D. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word 
was with God, andthe Word was God.. The same was 
in the beginning with God. All things were made by 
Him, and without Him was not anything made that 
was made. In Him was life, and the life was the 
light of men; and the light shineth in darkness 
and the darkness comprehended it not. 


There was a man sent from God, whose name was 
John. This man came for a witness, to bear wit- 
ness of the Light, that all might believe through. 
him. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear 
witness of that Light. That was the true Light 
which lighteth every man that cometh into this world. 





HOLY SATURDAY 79 


He was in the world, and the world was made by 
Him, and the world knew Him not. He came unto 
_His own, and His own received Him not. But as 
“many as received Him, to them gave He power to 
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on 

His Name; which were born, not of blood, nor of 
_ the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of 

God. (All now genuflect.) And the Word was made 
Flesh (all rise again), and dwelt among us, and we 
beheld His glory, the glory as of the alone-born Son 
of the Father, full of grace and truth. 





The deacon now fixes into the paschal candle the 
five grains of incense, and the Priest blesses the candle, 
saying: 


Let this candle be + purified and + blessed by 
Him in Whose honour it shall be burned. 


The deacon lights the paschal candle and Altar candles 
from the triple candle, and also any other lamps of the . 
church (save that which burns before the Blessed Sac- 
rament). 


P. Let us pray. 


Blessed Lord, may our hearts be so stirred by Thy 
power during this Easter Festival that, arising from 
the darkness of sin and ignorance, we may shine 
with the splendour of Thy light, O Thou Who art 
eur Sun of Righteousness. R. Amen. 


The deacon resumes the violet dalmatic. If it be 
convenient, a baptism may now be performed, im ac- 
cordance with the ancient custom of the Church. 


After the water has been blessed in the usual man- 
ner, the Priest lowers the base of the triple candle into 
the water and makes with it the sign of the cross in the 
water thrice, saying: 

In the Name of the + Father, and of the + Son, 
and of the Holy + Ghost. BR. Amen. 


80 HOLY SATURDAY 


The baptism being ended, the Eucharist of the Pre- 
sanctified follows. It begins with four Collects, the first 
from the ordinary Eucharistic service, the second as giv- — 
en below, the third that of Ash Wednesday, and the 
fourth the customary Prayer for Peace, after which the 
Epistle and Gospel are read as usual. 


The Collect 


LORD CHRIST, Whose Life Thy Church doth lay 
before us as a perfect ensample for our imitation, 
grant that we may follow Thee through mystic burial 
into newness of life, Who livest and reignest in eter- 
nal glory. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the third chapter of the 
First Epistle General of St. Peter, beginning at the 
fourteenth verse. 


BUT and if ye suffer for righteousness’ sake, hap- 
py are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither 
be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, 
and be ready always to give an answer to every 
man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is 
in you; having a good conscience, that whereas they 
speak evil of you as of evildoers, they may be asham- 
ed that falsely accuse your good conversation in 
Christ. It is better, if the will of God be so, that 
ye suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing. For 
Christ also hath once suffered, being put to death in 
the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. By which also 
He went and preached to the spirits in prison, 
but now is gone into heaven, and is on the right 
hand of God, Angels and Authorities and Powers be- 
ing made subject unto Him. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


EASTER DAY 81 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-seventh 
chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the fifty-seventh verse. 


WHEN the even was come, there came a rich: 
man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself 
was Jesus’ disciple. He went to Pilate, and begged 
the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body 
to be delivered. And when Joseph had taken the 
body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid 
it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in 
the rock; and he rolled a great stone to the door of 
the sepulchre, and departed. And there was Mary 
Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against 
the sepulchre. Now the next day that followed the 
day of the preparation, the chief priests and Phari- 
sees came together unto Pilate, saying: Sir, we re- 
member that that deceiver said, while He was yet 
alive: After three days I will rise again. Command, 
therefore, that the sepulchre be made sure until the 
third day, lest His disciples come by night and steal 
Him away, and say unto the people: He is risen from 
the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the 
first. Pilate said unto them: Ye have a watch; go 
your way, make it as sure as ye can. So they went 
and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and 
setting a watch. 








The sermon, if there is to be one, is given here. Then 
the procession is formed to bring in the Presanctified 
Host, and the remainder of the service follows exactly 
the course of that of the preceding day. 


Easter Day 


The Collect 


O GOD of Love, we praise Thee, we bless Thee, 
with all our hearts do we thank Thee and magnify 
Thy name for this most holy and wondrous Festival 
of Easter, for in the glorious victory which in it is 


82 EASTER DAY 





commemorated and symbolized, Thou hast given us 
the sure and certain witness that good shall finally 
triumph over ill, and that death is but a gateway 
to the ineffable splendour of eternal life in Thee, O 
never-setting Sun of Righteousness, Who livest and 
‘reignest God for ever and ever. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fifteenth chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the twelfth verse. 


NOW if Christ be preached that He rose from the 
dead, how say some among you that there is no re- 
surrection of the dead?  SBut if there be no resur- 
rection of the dead, then is Christ not risen; and if 
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain. But 
some man will say: How are the dead raised up, and 
with what body do they come? ‘That which thou 
sowest is not quickened except it die, and that which 
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall 
be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of 
some other grain. But God giveth it a body as it 
hath pleased Him, and to every seed his own body. 
So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in 
corruption; it is raised in incorruption. It is sown 
in dishonour; it is raised in glory. It is sown in 
weakness; it is raised in power. It is sown a natural 
body; it is raised a spiritual body. For there is a 
natural body, and there is a spirituai body. So this 
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal 
must put on immortality. O death, where is thy 
sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be 
to God, Who giveth us the victory through our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-eighth 
chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at 
the first verse. 


FIRST SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 83 


AS it began to dawn towards the first day of the 
week came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary 
to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there was a great 
earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from 
heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from 
the door and sat upon it. His countenance was like 
lightning, and his raiment white as snow, and for 
fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as 
dead men. And the Angel said unto the women: Fear 
not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus, Who was 
crucified. Why seek ye the living amidst the dead ? 
He is not here; He has risen, as He said. Come, 
see the place where the Lord lay. And go quickly 
and tell His disciples that He is risen from the dead. 
And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with 
fear and great joy, and did run to bring His disciples 
word. And as they went to tell His disciples, be- 
hold, Jesus met them, saying: All hail. And they 
came and took Him by the feet, and worshipped 
Him. 


Che Hirst Sunday after Easter, or 
Low Sunday 


The Collect 


O LORD Christ, by Whose eternal Sacrifice we 
exist, and in Whose victory we triumph, grant that, 
in joy or in sorrow, we may never lose our grateful 
memory of Thine unchanging love, Who livest and 
reignest God throughout all ages. R. Amen. 


Then shall be read the Collect for Easter Day. 


The Epistle 
The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the tenth chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the thirty-fourth verse. 
PETER opened his mouth, and said: Of a truth I 
perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but. in 


84 FIRST SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


every nation he that feareth Him, and worketh 
righteousness, is accepted with Him. The word which 
God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace 
by Jesus Christ (He is Lord of all), that word (I say) 
ye know, which was published throughout all Judea, 
and began from Galilee, after the baptism which John 
preached; how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with 
the Holy Ghost, and with power; Who went about 
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of 
the devil; for God was with Him. And we are wit- 
nesses of all things which He did, both in the land 
of the Jews and in Jerusalem; Whom they slew, and 
hanged on a tree; Him God raised up the third day, 
and showed Him openly; not to all the people, but 
unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who 
did eat and drink with Him after He rose from the 
dead. And He commanded us to preach unto the 
people, and to testify that it is He Who was ordained 
of God to. be the Judge of quick and dead, 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fourth 
chapter of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the 
thirteenth verse. 


BEHOLD, two of His disciples went that same 
day to a village called Emmaus, which was from 
Jerusalem about three-score furlongs. And they 
talked together of all these things which had hap- 
pened. And it came to pass that, while they com- 
muned together and reasoned, Jesus Himself drew 
near, and went with them. But their eyes’ were 
holden, that they should not know Him. And He 
said unto them: What manner of communications are 
these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and 
are sad? And the one of them, whose name was 
Cleopas, answering, said unto Him: Art thou only 
a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the 
things which are come to pass there in these days ? 


FIRST SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 85 


And He said unto them: What things? And they 
said unto Him: Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, Who 
was a prophet mighty in deed and word, before 
God and all the people; and how the chief priests 
and our rulers delivered Him to be condemned to 
death, and have crucified Him. But we trusted that 
it had been He which should have redeemed Israel; 
and, besides all this, to-day is the third day since 
these things were done. Yea, and certain women al- 
so of our company made us astonished, which were 
early at the sepulchre; and when they found not 
His body, they came, saying that they had also seen 
a vision of Angels, which said that He was alive. 
And certain of them which were with us went to 
the sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had 
said; but Him they saw not. Then He said unto 
them: O fools and slow of heart to believe all that 
the prophets have spoken; ought not Christ to have 
suffered these things, and to enter into His glory ? 
And, beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, He 
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things 
concerning Himself. And they drew nigh unto the 
village whither they went, and He made as though 
He would have gone further; but they constrained 
Him, saying: Abide with us, for it is towards even- 
ing, and the day is far spent. And He went in to 
tarry with them. And it came to pass, as He sat at 
meat with them, He took bread, and blessed it, and 
brake, and gave it to them. And their eyes were 
opened, and they knew Him, and He vanished out 
of their sight. And they said one to another: Did not 
our heart burn within us while He talked with us 
by the way, and while He opened to us the Scrip- 
tures? And they rose up the same hour with them, 
turned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered 
together, and them that were with them, saying: 
The Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared 
to Simon. And they told what things were done 
in the way, and how He was known of them in break- 


ing of bread. 


86 SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


Che Serond Sunday alter Easter 


The Collect 


O LORD Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, Who as 
at holy Hastertide didst rise from the darkness of 
death to shine with exceeding glory upon Thy people, 
hasten Thou Thy Coming, we pray Thee, that once 
more that brightness may rise upon our longing eyes, 
and that all the earth may be filled with Thy glory, 
even as the waters cover the sea, Thou Who dwellest 
ever in the unity of the Father and the Holy Ghost 
throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Hpistle is taken from the fifth chapter of the 
First Epistle General of St. John, beginning at the 
fourth verse. 


WHATSOEVER is born of God overcometh the 
world; and this is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh 
the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the 
Son of God ? This is He that came by water and blood, 
even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water 
and blood; and it is the Spirit that beareth witness, 
because the Spirit is truth. For there are Three that 
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and 
the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One. And this 
is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life; 
and this life is in His Son. He that hath the Son 
hath life; and he that hath not the Son hath not 
life. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 
The holy Gospel is taken from the twentieth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the nine- 
teenth verse. 
THE same day at evening, being the first day 
of the week, when the doors were shut where the dis- 
ciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 87 


Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them: 
Peace be unto you. And when He had so said, He 
showed unto them His hands and His side. Then 
were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord. 
Then said Jesus to them again: Peace be unto you; 
as My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you. And 
when He had said this, He breathed on them, and 
saith unto them: Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose- 
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; 
and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. 





Che Chird Sunday after Easter 


The Collect 


O LORD Christ, as Thou didst at this season rise 
from death into the wondrous power of an endless 
life, so may we by Thy most gracious help rise from 
the darkness of sin into the ineffabie splendour of 
conscious life in Thee, O Light of Light, Who livest 
and reignest for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the second and third chap- 
ters of the Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Colos- 
sians, beginning at the sixth verse. 


AS ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the 
Lord, so walk ye in Him; rooted and built up in 
Him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been 
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. For 
in Him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bod- 
ily; and ye are complete in Him, Who is the Head 
of all principality and power; buried with Him in 
baptism, wherein also ye are risen with Him through 
the faith of the operation of God, Who hath raised 
Him from the dead. If ye then be risen with Christ, 
seek those things which are above, where Christ 


88 FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affec- 
tion on things above, not on things on the earth; for 
ye are dead to earth, and your life is hid with 
Christ in God. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fourth 
chapter of that according to St. Luke, beginning at 
the thirty-sixth verse. 

JESUS Himself stood in the midst of them, and 
saith unto them: Peace be unto you. And He said: 
These are the words which I spake unto you while I 
was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled 
which were written in the law of Moses and in the 
Prophets and in the Psalms concerning Me. Then 
opened He their understanding, that they might un- 
derstand the Scriptures, and said unto them: Thus 
it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, 
and to rise from the dead the third day; and that 
repentance and remission of sins should be preached 
in His Name among all nations, beginning at Jeru- 
salem. And ye are witnesses of these things. 





Che Hourth Sunday after Easter 


The Collect 


O CHRIST our Lord and Master, grant that as 
Thou hast risen from the dead, Thy people may rise 
from ignorance to the firm ground of true know- 
ledge, and thence, press onwards towards the mount 
of heavenly wisdom, where fair peace forever dwells, 
Thou Who livest and reignest throughout the ages 
of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the thirteenth chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the twenty-seventh verse. 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 89 


THEY that dwell in Jerusalem, though they found 
no cause of death in Him, yet desired they Pilate 
that He should be slain. And when they had fulfilled 
all that was written of Him they took Him down 
from the tree, and laid Him in a sepulchre. But 
God raised Him from the dead, and He was seen 
many days of them which came up with Him from 
Galilee to Jerusalem, who are His witnesses unto the 
people. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how 
that the promise which was made unto the fathers 
God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, 
in that He hath raised up Jesus again; as it is writ- 
ten in the Psalm, Thou shalt not suffer Thine Holy 
One to see corruption. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel. is taken from the sixteenth chapter 
of that according to St. Mark, beginning at the first 
verse. 


WHEN the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, 
and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had 
bought sweet spices, that they might come and an- 
oint Him. And very early in the morning the first 
day of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at 
the rising of the sun. And they said among them- 
selves: Who shall roll us away the stone from the 
door of the sepulchre? And when they looked they 
saw that the stone was rolled away; for it was very 
great. And, entering into the sepulchre, they saw a 
young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long 
white garment, and they were affrighted. And he 
saith unto them: Be not affrighted; ye seek Jesus 
of Nazareth Which was crucified. He is risen; He is 
- not here; behold the place where they laid Him. 
But go your way, tell His disciples and Peter that 
He goes before you into Galilee: there shall ye see 
Him, as He said unto you. 


90 FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


Che Hifth Sunday after Easter 


The Collect 


LORD Christ, Whose wondrous triumph Thy faith- 
ful people year by year do celebrate, we pray Thee 
that as the years roll on we also may triumph over 
sin, and, following Thy glorious ensample, may rise 
unto the fullness of our spiritual heritage, O Thou 
Who livest and reignest with the Father and the 
Holy Spirit, God throughout all ages of ages. R. 
Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
-is taken from the second chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the twenty-second verse. 


YE men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of 
Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by 
miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by 
Him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know: 
Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and 
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked 
hands have crucified and slaine Whom God hath 
raised up, having loosed the pains of death; because 
it was not possible that He should be holden of it. 
For David speaketh concerning Him, being a pro- 
phet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath 
to him that of the fruit of his loins He would raise 
up Christ to sit on his throne; he seeing this before 
spake of the resurrection of Christ, that His soul 
was not left in hell, neither His flesh did see cor- 
ruption. This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof 
we all are witnesses. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixteenth chapter 
vf that according to St. Mark, beginning at the ninth 
verse. 


ASCENSION DAY 91 


: NOW when Jesus was risen early the first day of 
the week, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out 
of whom He had cast seven devils. And she went 
and told them that had been with Him, as 
they mourned and wept. And they, when they heard 
that He was alive, and had been seen of her, believed 
not. After that He appeared in another form unto 

-two of them, as they walked, and went into the 
country. And they went and told it unto the resi- 
due: neither believed they them. Afterward He 
appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and 
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of 
heart, because they believed not them which had seen 
Him after He was risen. And He said unto them: 
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to 
every creature. 





Che Asrension Day 


The Collect 


O GOD, the King of glory, we pray Thee that, as 
Thine alone-born Son our dear Lord Christ hath as- 
cended into the heavens, we may also in heart and 
mind thither ascend, and with Him continually dwell, 
Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy 
Ghost, one God, throughout all ages of ages. R. 
Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
ig taken from the first chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the fifth verse. 


JESUS said unto His Apostles: John truly baptized 
with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy 
Ghost not many days hence. And ye shall receive 
power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you; 
* and ye shall be witnesses unto Me, both in Jerusalem 
and in all Judea, and in Samaria and unto the ut- 
termost part of the earth. And when He had spoken 


92 ASCENSION DAY 


Se 
these things, while they beheld, He was taken up, 
and a cloud received Him out of their sight. And 
while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as He 
went up, behold, two men stood by them in white 
apparel; which also said: Ye men of Galilee, why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, 
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so 
come, in like manner as ye have seen Him go into © 
heaven. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fourth 
chapter of that according to St. Luke, beginning at 
the forty-ninth verse. 


BEHOLD, I send the promise of My Father upon 
you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye 
be endued with power from on high. And He led 
them out as far as to Bethany, and He lifted up 
His hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, 
while He blessed them, He was parted from them, 
and carried up into heaven. And they worshipped 
Him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and 
were continually in the temple, praising and bless- 
ing God. Amen. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve 
for nine days after. 





After the Gospel on Ascension Day, when the deacon 
has censed the celebrant, the latter shall reverently eax- 
tinguish the Paschal Candle, saying: 


The great forty days are over; the Lord hath as- 
cended into heaven; and so in His Name I extinguish 
this Paschal Candle, which for forty days has sym- 
bolized among us His risen body, for a token that as 
its light, leaving this lower world, passes to higher 
realms, so may we in heart and mind thither ascend 
and with Him continually dwell. 


WHITSUNDAY 93 


Whitsunday 
The Collect a 


GOD, Who as at this time didst teach the hearts of 
Thy faithful people, by the sending to them the light 
of Thy Holy Spirit; grant us by the same Spirit to 
have a right judgment in all things, and evermore 
to rejoice in His holy comfort; through the love of 
Christ our Master, Who liveth and reigneth with 
Thee, in the unity of the same Spirit, one God, 
throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the second chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the first verse. 


WHEN the day of Pentecost was fully come, they 
were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly 
there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing 
mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they 
were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven 
tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of 
them; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, 
and began to speak with other tongues, as the 
Spirit gave them utterance. And there were dwelling 
at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation 
under heaven. Now when this was noised abroad, 
the multitude came together, and were confound- 
ed, because that every man heard them speak in his 
own language. And they were all amazed, and mar- 
velled, saying one to another: Behold, are not all 
these which speak Galileans? And how hear we ev- 
ery man in our own tongue wherein we were born ? 
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwell- 
"ers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea and Cappadocia, 
in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in 
Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and 


94 TRINITY SUNDAY 


strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and 
Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the 
wonderful works of God. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourteenth chap- 
ter of that according to St. John, beginning at the 
sixteenth verse. 


JESUS said unto His disciples: I will pray the 
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, 
that He may abide with you for ever; even the 
Spirit of Truth, Whom the world cannot receive, be- 
cause it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him; but 
ye know Him; for He dwelleth with you, and shall 
be in you. I will not leave you comfortless; I will 
come to you. Yet a little while, and the world seeth 
Me no more; but ye see Me; because I live, ye shall 
live also. The Comforter, Which is the Holy Ghost, 
Whom the Father will send in My Name, He shall 
teach you all things, and bring all things to your 
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Peace 
I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: not as 
the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your 
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. 





Crintty Sunday 
The Collect 


ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, Who hast given 
unto us Thy servants by the confession of a true 
faith to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trin- 
ity, and in the power of the Divine Majesty to wor- 
ship the Unity; we pray Thee that Thou wouldest 
keep us steadfast in this knowledge, and evermore 
defend us from all error, Who livest and reignest, 
one God, throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


TRINITY SUNDAY 95 
The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the fourth chapter of the Book of 
the Revelation of St. John the Divine, beginning at the 
second verse. 


IMMEDIATELY I was in the Spirit; and behold, 
a throne was set in heaven, and One sat on the 
throne. And He that sat was to look upon like a 
jasper and a sardine stone; and there was a rainbow 
round about the throne, in sight like unto an emer- 
ald. And round about the throne were four and 
twenty seats; and upon the seats I saw four and 
twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and 
they had on their heads crowns of gold. And out 
of the throne proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, 
and voices. And there were seven lamps of fire 
burning before the throne, which are the -seven 
Spirits of God. And before the throne there was a 
sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of 
the throne, and round about the throne, were four 
beasts full of eyes before and behind. And 
the first beast was like a lion, and _ the 
second beast like a calf; and the third beast 
had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like 
a flying eagle. And the four beasts had each of them 
six wings about him; and they were full of eyes with- 
in: and they rest not day and night, saying: Holy, 
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, 
and is to come. And when those beasts give glory, 
and honour, and thanks, to Him that sat on the 
throne, Who liveth for ever and ever, the four and 
twenty elders fall down before Him that sat on 
the throne, and worship Him that liveth for ever and 
ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying: 
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, 
_ and power; for Thou hast created all things, and for 
Thy pleasure they are and were created. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 





96 CORPUS CHRISTI 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourteenth chap- 
ter of that according to St. John, beginning at the 
sixth verse. 


JESUS said: I am the Way, the Truth, and the 
Life; no man cometh unto the Father, but by Me. 
He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father; for I 
am in the Father, and the Father in Me. I and My 
Father are one; as the Father hath loved Me, so have 
I loved you; and this is My commandment, that ye 
love one another, as I have loved you. When the 
Comforter is come, Whom I will send unto you from 
the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which pro- 
ceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me. And 
ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with 
Me from the beginning. By this shall all men know 
that ye are My disciples, if ye have love one to 
another. 





Corpus Christi 


The Collect 


O CHRIST our holy Lord, Who in this wonderful 
Sacrament of the Altar hast given unto us the grace 
of Thy perpetual Presence and an abiding memorial 
of Thy surpassing love; grant us so to receive this 
Thy most precious gift, that our hearts may be ‘pure 
in Thy sight and our lives ever dedicated to Thy 
service, Who livest and reignest with the Father 
and the Holy Spirit, one God throughout all ages of 
ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the eleventh chapter of 
the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Cor- 
inthians, beginning at the twenty-third verse. 


FOR I have received of the Lord that which also I 


delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night 
in which He was betrayed, took bread. And when 


_CORPUS CHRISTI — 97 


He had given thanks, He. brake it, and said: Take, 
eat; this is My Body, which is broken for you; 
this do in remembrance of Me. After the same man- 
ner also He took the cup, when He had supped, say- 
ing: Thiscup is the new testament in My Blood; 
this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance 
of Me. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink 
this Cup, ye do show the Lord’s death till He 
come. ‘ 
Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 
“The holy Gospel is taken from’ the’ sixth chapter 
of that according to St. J ohn, beginning at the forty- 
seventh verse. 


AMEN, Amen, I say unto you: He that believeth 
on Me -hath everlasting life. I am that Bread. of 
life. ; This’ is the Bread which cometh: down. from 
heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. I 
am the living’ Bread which came down from. heaven; 
if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever; 
and the Bread that I will give is My Flesh, which 
I will give for the life of the world. The Jews there- 
fore strove among themselves, saying: How can this 
man give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto 
them: Amen, Amen, I say unto you: Except ye 
eat the. Flesh of the Son-of Man, and drink His 
Blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth My 
Flesh, and drinketh My Blood, hath eternal life; and 
I will raise him up at the last day. For My Flesh 
is meat indeed, and My Blood is drink indeed. He 
that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood, dwell- 
eth in Me, and I in him. As the living Father hath 
sent Me, and I live by the Father: so he that 
eateth Me, even. he shall live by Me.. This is that 
Bread which came down from Heaven; not. as your 
fathers did eat manna, and are dead; he that eateth 
ofthis Bread shall live for ever, 


98 SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY. 


At the chief celebration of the Holy Eucharist the 
Blessed Sacrament is carried round the Church in pro- — 
cession in the monstrance during the singing of the ; 
Adeste Fideles. If this hymn be not long enough, it 
should be supplemented by some other Eucharistic hymn. 
At the evening service there ‘should be Solemn Benedic- 
tion and procession of the Sacred Host. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
the following Sunday and until the Second Sunday after 
Trinity. 


Che Serond Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: GOD as Light 


The Collect 


O FATHER of Light, in Whom is no darkness at 
all; may our hearts be so irradiated by the glory of 
Thy divine Love that we may ever shine as beacons 
amid the stormy sea of life; that through us weary 
and tempest:driven souls may be guided to the haven 
where they would be, and may rest in the eternal 
sunlight of Thy holy Presence, through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
First Epistle General of St. John, beginning at the 
third verse. 


THAT which we have seen and heard declare we 
unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; 
and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with 
His Son Jesus Christ. These things write we unto 
you that your joy may be full. This then is the 
message which we have heard of Him and declare 
unto you, that God is Light, and in Him is no dark- 


-ness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with 


Him and walk in darkness we lie, and do not the 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 99 


truth. But if we walk in the light, as He is in the 
light, we have fellowship one with another. He that 
saith he is in the light and hateth his brother is in 
darkness even until now. He that loveth his brother 
abideth in the light and there is none occasion of 
stumbling in him. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twelfth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the thirty- 
second verse. 


I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all 
men unto Me. Yet a little while is the light with 
you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness 
come upon you; for he that walketh in darkness 
knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light, 
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of 
light. He that believeth on Me, believeth not on Me 
only, but on Him that sent Me; and he that seeth 
‘Me, seeth Him that sent Me. I am come a light 
‘into the world, that whosoever believeth on Me 
‘should not abide in darkness. 


| 





Che Third Sunday after Trinity 


| Intent: GOD as the Ruler of Angels. 


The Collect 


O GOD the King of Angels, Ruler of all the Hosts 
‘of heaven, we praise and thank Thee for the help 
which these Thy radiant servants so joyously do ren- 
(der unto us, and pray that we may pattern after them 
jin purity and zeal, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
jis taken from the twelfth chapter of the Book of 
|Tobit, beginning at the sixth verse. 


¢ 





E2 





“ AND the Angel said unto them: Bless God, praise 
Him and magnify Him, and: praise Him for the — 


things which He hath done unto you in: the sight of i 


all that live.’ It is good to praise God and exalt His 
Name, and honourably to show forth the works of 
God; therefore be not slack to praise Him. Do that 
which is good, and no evil shall touch you. A little 
with righteousness is better than much with un- 
righteousness. It is better to give alms than to lay 
up gold; for those. that exercise alms and righteous- 
ness ‘shall be filled with life, but they. that sin. are 
enemies to their own life. God hath sent me to heal 
thee and thy daughter, for I am Raphael, one of the 
seven holy Angels which present the prayers of the 
saints, and go in and os Lee the glory of the: 
Holy One. 


Then they were troubled and fell. upon their faces; 
for they feared. But the Angel said unto them: 
Fear not; it shall go well with you. Not of any fav- 
our of mine, ‘but of the will of our God I came; 
therefore praise Him for ever and give Him thanks, 
for I go up to Him that sent me. 


Then they confessed the great and wonderful 
works of God, and how the Angel of the Lord had 
appeared unto them; and they said: Blessed art Thou, 
O God, and blessed is Thy name for ever; and. bless- 
ed are all Thy holy Angels. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The ‘Gospel 


The, holy Gospel is taken from the first , chapter of 
that. according to St. Luke, beginning at the eighth 
verse.: 


WHILE vacWarins executed the DEleat® s office be: 
fore God in the order of his course, according to the 
custom of the priest’s office, his lot was to burn in-— 
cense when he went into the temple ‘of the Lord. 
And the whole multitude of the people were praying 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 101 


without at the time of incense. And there appeared 
unto him an Angel of the Lord, standing on the right 
‘side of the altar of incense. And when’ Zacharias 
saw him, he was’ troubled, and fear fell upon him; 
but the Angel said unto him: Fear not, Zacharias; 
thy prayer is heard, and thou shalt have joy and 
gladness. I-am Gabriel, that stand in the Presence 
of God; and I am sent to speak unto thee, and to 
show thee these glad tidings. 


Che Hourth Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: GOD as Love 


The Collect 


O CHRIST, the Lord of Love, we lay our hearts 
upon Thy shrine, praying that Thou wilt accept, pur- 
ify and enkindle them, so that they may forever 
glow with the undying fire of Thine infinite compas- 
sion, Who livest and reignest with the Father and the 

oly Spirit, one God throughout all ages of ages. R. 
ten. 


it ee The Epistle 
| The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of 


the First Epistle General of St. John, beginning at 
he seventh verse. 


BELOVED, let us love one another; for love is of 
d, and everyone that loveth is born of God, and know- 
th God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for 
od is Love. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought 
Iso to love one another. No man hath seen God 
t any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth 

us, and His love is perfected in us. Hereby know 

that we dwell in Him, and He in us, because He 
ath given us His Spirit. God is Love; and he that 
welleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. 
here is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out 








102 FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


We 
fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth 
is not made perfect in love. We love Him, because — 
He first loved us. If a man say: I love God, and hat- — 
eth his brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not — 
his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God, 
Whom he hath not seen? And this commandment 
have we from Him, that he who loveth God love his 
brother also. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifteenth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the first 
verse. 


I AM the true vine, and My Father is the Hus- 
bandman. I am the Vine, ye are the branches. Abide 
in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit 
of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can 
ye, except ye abide in Me. He that abideth in Me, 
and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; 
for without Me ye can do nothing. Herein is My 
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall 
ye be My disciples. As the Father hath loved Me, 
so have I loved you; continue ye in My love. If ye 
keep My commandments, ye shall abide in My love; 
even as I have kept My Father’s commandments, 
and abide in His love. These things have I spoken 
unto you, that My joy might remain in you, and 
that your joy might be full. These things I com- 
mand you, that ye love one another. 





The Hifth Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: GOD as Peace 


The Collect 


GRANT, O Lord, that the course of this world 
may soon be so peaceably ordered by Thy governance 
that Thy Church may joyfully serve Thee in all god- 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 103 


ly quietness, through Christ our Lord, Who liveth 
and reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost, ever One 
God throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fifth chapter of that 
of St. Paul the Apostle to the Galatians, beginning 
at the thirteenth verse. 


_ BRETHREN, ye have been called unto liberty; 
only, use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but 
‘by love serve one another. For all the law is ful- 
filled in one word, even in this: Thou shalt love thy 
ineighbour as thyself. This I say then: Walk in the 
‘Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh 
For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spir- 
lit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one 
ito the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye 
\would. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temper- 
lance; against such there is no law. If we live in the 
‘Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 
The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourteenth chap- 
i of that according to St. John, beginning at the 
ighteenth verse. 










JESUS said: I will not leave you comfortless; I 
i]1 come to you. Because I live, ye shall live also. 
+ that day ye shall know that I am in My Father, 
bnd ye in Me, and I in you. He that hath My com- 
andments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth 
e; and he that loveth Me shall be loved of My 
‘ather, and I will love him, and will manifest My- 
elf to him. If a man love Me, he will keep My 
vords; and My Father will love him, and We will 
ome unto him, and make Our abode with him. He 
hat keepeth not My sayings loveth Me not. Peace 





104 SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


I leave with you, My peace I give unto you; not 
as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not yous 
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. : 


Che Sixth Sunday after Crinity 
Intent: Steadfast Service 


The Collect 


O GOD, Who hast prepared for Thy faithful ser- 
vants such good things as pass man’s understand- 
ing; may our hearts be so filled with love towards 
Thee, that we, loving Thee above all things, may 
show forth that love in continual service to our 
brethren, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the twelfth chapter of 
the Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Romans, be- 
ginning at the first verse. 


I BESEECH you, therefore, brethren, that ye pre- 
sent your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
unto God, which is your reasonable service. Let love 
be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil; 
cleave to that which is good. Be kindly affectioned 
one to another in brotherly love, in honour preferring 
one another; not slothful in business; fervent’ in 
spirit, serving the Lord; rejoicing in hope, patient 
in tribulation; distributing to the necessity of saints, 
given to -hospitality. Bless them which persecute 
you; bless, and curse not. Rejoice with them that 
do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Be of 
the same mind one towards another. Mind not high 
things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be 
not wise in your own conceit. Recompense to no 
man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the 
sight of all men. If it be possible, as much as lieth 


SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 105 
ee 


in you, live peaceably with all men. Owe no man 
anything, but to love one another, for he that loveth 
vanother hath fulfilled the law. Love worketh no ill 
‘to his ‘neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of 
pate law. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fifth chap- 
ter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
thirty-first verse. 


When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, 
and all the holy Angels with Him, then shall He sit 
upon the throne of His glory. Before Him shall 
be gathered all nations, and He shall separate them 
‘one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep 
from. the goats; and He shall set the sheep on His 
right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall 
the King say unto them on His right hand: Come, 
ye blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepar- 
ed for you from the foundation of the world: For 
'I was an hungred and ye gave Me meat; I was 
thirsty and ye gave Me drink; I was a stranger, and 
| ye took Me in; naked,. and ye clothed Me; I was 
sick, and ye visited Me; I was in prison, and ye 
‘came unto Me. Then shall the righteous answer 
Him, saying: Lord, when saw we Thee an hun- 
(gred, and fed Thee ? or thirsty, and gave Thee 
‘drink ? When saw we Thee a stranger, and took 
Thee in? Or naked, and clothed Thee? Or when 
‘saw we Thee sick, or in prison, and came unto Thee ? 
‘And the King shall answer and say unto them: 
}Amen, I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it 
junto ‘one of the least of these My brethren, ye have 
(done it unto Me. ‘Then shall He say also unto them 
jon the left hand:’ Depart from Me. For I was an hun- 
(gred, and ye gave Me no meat; I was thirsty, and 
ye gave Me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took 
Me not in; naked, and ye clothed Me not; sick, and 








106 SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


in prison, and ye visited Me not. Then shall they 
also answer Him saying: Lord, when saw we Thee 
an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or 
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto Thee? 
Then shall He answer them, saying: Amen, I say 
unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the 
least of these, ye did it not to Me. 


Che Seuenth Sunday after Trinity 
Intent: Purity; a day of devotion to the Holy Spirit 


The Collect 


O SPIRIT of all-perfect Purity, before Whose 
light an Angel veils his face, we Thy humble ser- 
vants, sin-stained and weary though we be, do now 
most earnestly desire to keep our hearts unspotted 
from the world. To reach this purity we ask for 
strength from Thee, Who, with the Father, and the Son, 
livest and reignest one God throughout all ages of 
ages. R. Amen. 


The Eprstle 


The Epistle is taken from the second chapter of 
the First Epistle General of St. John, beginning at the 
fifteenth verse. 


LOVE not the world, neither the things that are 
in the world; for all that is in the world, the lust 
of the flesh, ‘and the lust of the eyes, and the pride 
of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And 
the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but 
he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever. Let 
that therefore abide in you which ye have. heard 
from the beginning; for this is the promise that He 
hath promised us, even eternal life. Behold, what 
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, 
that we should be called the sons of God. Beloved, 
now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet ap- 


EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 107 


pear what we shall be; but we know that when He 
shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shail see 

z Him as He is. And every man that hath this hope in 
‘him purifieth himself, even as He is pure. 


Here endeth the Hpistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the seventeenth chap- 
ter of that according to St. John, beginning at the 
eleventh verse. 


AND Jesus said: Holy Father, keep through Thine 
own Name those whom Thou hast given Me, that 
they may be one, as We are. I pray not that Thou 
shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou 
shouldest keep them from the evil. They art not of 
the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify 
them through Thy truth; Thy word is truth. Neither 
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall 
believe on Me through their word; that they all 
may be one, as Thou, Father, art in Me and I in 
Thee, that they also may be one in Us. The glory 
which Thou gavest Me I have given them; that they 
may be one, even as We are one. I in them, and 
Thou in Me, that they may be made perfect in one; 
and that the world may know that Thou hast loved 
them, as Thou hast loved Me. Father, I will that 
they also, whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me 
where I am. I have declared unto them Thy Name, 
that the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may 
be in them, and I in them, 





Che Eighth Sunday after Crinity 
Intent: Wisdom 


The Collect 


O GOD, Who art the Wisdom of the wise and the 
Strength of the strong, Whose Beauty shines through 
the whole universe; may we so open our hearts to the 





108 EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


Spirit of wisdom and understanding that we may 
ever be strong in Thee, our Rock of Ages, and may 
show forth in our lives the beauty of holiness, — 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen, : 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the third chapter of the 
General Epistle of St. James, beginning at the thir- 
teenth verse. 


WHO is a wise man, and endued with knowledge 
among you? Let him show out of a good conver- 
sation his works ‘with meekness of wisdom. But if 
ye have bitter envying and ‘strife in your hearts, 
glory not, and lie not against the truth. Such wis- 
dom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sen- 
sual, devilish. For where envying and strife is, 
there is confusion and’ every evil work. But the wis- 
dom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, 
gentle, and easy to ‘be entreated, full of mercy and 
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypo- 
crisy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace 
of them that make peace. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


et The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the second chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the fortieth 
verse. ; 


THE child Jesus grew, and waxed strong in spirit, 
filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon 
Him. Now His parents went to Jerusalem every year 
at the feast of the passover. And when He was twelve 
years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the cus- 
tom of the feast. And when they had fulfilled the 
days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried be- 
hind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and His mother knew 
not of it. But they, supposing Him to have been 
in the company, went a day’s journey; and they 


NINTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 109 = 


sought Him among, their kinsfolk and acquaintance. 
And when they found Him not, they turned back 
_ again to Jerusalem, seeking Him. -And it came to 
~~ pass, that after three days they found Him in the 
temple; sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hear- 
ing them, and asking them questions.. And all that 
heard Him were astonished at His understanding 
and answers.’ And when they saw: Him they were 
amazed: and His mother said unto Him: Son, why 
hast Thou |thus: dealt: with- us? ° Behold, Thy father 
and I have sought Thee sorrowing.. And He. said 
unto them; How is it that ye sought Me? Wist.ye 
not that I must be about my Father’s business ? And 
they understood not the saying which He spake unto 
them. But His mother kept all these sayings in her 
heart. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, 
and in favour with God and man. 





The Ninth Sunday After Crinity 
Intent: Confidence. 


The: Collect 


‘Oo LORD, Who never failest to help and govern 
them whom Thou dost bring up in Thy steadfast 
joy , and love; may we abide for ever ‘under ‘the 
protection of Thy good providence, and be filled with 
perpetual reverence and love for Thy holy Name, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 

The’ Epistle is’ taken from the ‘second chapter of 
that of St. Paul the Apostle to the Philippians, begin- 
ning at the second verse. 

‘FULFIL ye my joy; be ye likeminded, having the 
“same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let 
nothing be done through strife.or vainglory; but in 
lowliness of heart Jet each esteem other better than 


110 TENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


himself. Look not every man on his own things, 
but every man also on the things of others. Let 
this mind be in you, which was also in Christ 
Jesus, Who, being in the form of God, made Himself 
of no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a 
servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and 
became obedient unto death. Wherefore God hath 
highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name which is 
above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every 
knee should bow, of things in heaven and things in 
earth, and things under the earth, and that every 
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to 
the glory of God the Father. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twelfth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the twenty- 
third verse. 


JESUS said:. The hour is come that the Son of 
Man should be glorified. Amen, Amen, I say unto 
you, except a corn of wheat fall into the ground ana 
die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth 
much fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it; and 
he that careth not for his life in this world shall 
keep it unto life eternal. If any man serve Me, let 
him follow Me; and where I am, there shall also 
My servant be. Father, glorify Thy Name. Then 
came there a voice from heaven saying: I have both 
glorified it, and will glorify it again. 





Che Genth Sunday after Trinity 
Intent: Devotion 
The Collect 


LORD and Master, we Thy servants continually 
do worship Thee with heartfelt praise and thanks- 
giving; may our fervent adoration rise ever before 


a 


LHEINDTH SUNDAY AKLTHR TRINITY | 

_ Thee like incense, until the light of our love becomes 
one with Thine infinite Light, Thou Who livest and 
reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, One 


God throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle is 
taken from the fifteenth chapter of the Revelation of 
St. John the Divine, beginning at the second verse. 


I SAW as it were a sea of glass mingled with 
fire; and they that had gotten the victory over the 
beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and 
over the number of his name, stand on the sea of 
glass, having the harps of God. And they sing the 
song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of 
the Lamb, saying: Great and marvellous are Thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are Thy 
ways, Thou King of saints. Thou only art holy; for 
all nations shall come and worship before Thee, for 
Thy judgments are made manifest. Amen; blessing, 
and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and hon- 
our, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever 
and ever. Amen. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the nine- 
teenth verse. 

THE woman of Samaria saith unto Him: Sir, I 
perceive that Thou art a prophet. Our fathers wor- 
shipped in this mountain; and ye say that in Jeru- 
salem is the place where men ought to worship. Jesus 
said unto her: Believe Me, the hour cometh when 
ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jeru- 
salem, worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not 
- what; we know what we worship. But the hour 
cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall 
worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the 








112 ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


Father seeketh such to worship Him. God is a Spirit; 
and they that worship ‘Him must worship Him in 
spirit and in truth: The woman saith unto Him: 
I know that Messias cometh, ‘which is called the 
Christ; when He is come, He will tell us all things. 
Jesus said unto her: ‘I that speak unto thee am He. 





Che Eleventh Sunday after Crinity 
Intent: Discernment 

Be take The Collect | 

"0 GOD, Whose never-failing providence ordereth 
all things’ both in heaven and earth, grant that we 
may ‘unfold within ourselves such discernment, that 
we may avoid | those things, that be hurtful to the 
soul, and seek only those things that give us strength 
to. serve Thee better, ‘through Christ our Lord. ° R. 
Amen. 


! 


The Epistle 


The Hpistle is taken from the second chapter. of 
_the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Cor- 
inthians, beginning at the sixth verse. 


WE speak wisdom among them that are perfect; 
yet. not the wisdom of this world. But we speak 
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden 
wisdom which God ordained before the world unto ~ 
our glory. Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love Him. But God 
hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit; for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things’ of 
God. Now we have received not the spirit: of the 
world, but ‘the Spirit which is of God, that we. might 
know the things that are freely given to us of God. 
The natural man recéiveth not the things of the Spir- 
it- of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither 
‘can he know them, because they are spiritually dis- 


ITWHOPT oH SUNDAY AMPLE NW TRINITY 113 





cerned. ~ But he that is spiritual discerneth all things; 
vee he himself is discerned of no man. 


Bier’ endeth the Hpistle. 


The Gospel 


_ .The holy ‘Gospel is taken from the twelfth chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the fifty- 
fourth verse. 


JESUS add unto the vecnien When‘ ye see a cloud 
rise out of the west, straightway ye say: There 
cometh a shower; and so it is. And when ye see the 
south wind blow, ye say: There will be heat; and it 
cometh to pass. Ye can discern the face of the sky and 
of the earth; but how is it. that ye do not: discern 
this time? Yea, and why even of yourselves judge 
ye not what is right? Seek not ye what ye. shall 
eat or what ye shall drink, for all these things do 
the nations of the world seek after. Rather: ‘seek 
ye the. kingdom of God and His righteousness, and 
all these things shall’ be added unto you. . Fear not, 
little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure 
to ge you the kingdom. ; 28 


‘The Tinvltth Sumbay fier Crit 


Intent: Self-Dedication 


The Collect 


“ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, ane that we 
may ever increase in faith, hope and charity; and, that 
we may. quickly attain ‘that for which: Thou hast 
destined us, may we love the path which Thou hast 

| sordained, through Christ our -holy Lord. R. Amen. 


_ The Epistle 


“The Epistle. is sean from the fifteenth. caagber of 
that of St. Paul the Apostle to the Romans, beginning 
at the first verse. 


ee ee OT ee 





114 TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 





WE then that are strong ought to bear the infirm- 
ities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let 
everyone of us please his neighbour for his good to 
edification. For even Christ pleased not Himself. 
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you 
to be likeminded one toward another according to 
Christ Jesus; that ye may with one mind and one 
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ 
also received us to the glory of God. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifth chapter of 
that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the seven- 
teenth verse. 


THINK not that I am come to destroy the law 
or the prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to ful- 
fil. Amen, I say unto you: Till heaven and earth 
pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from 
the law till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore 
shall break one of these least commandments, and 
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in 
the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and 
teach them, the same shall be called great in the 
kingdom of heaven. For I say unto you that ex- 
cept your righteousness shall exceed the righteous- 
ness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye have heard 
that it hath been said: Thou shalt love thy neigh- 
bour and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you: 
Love your enemies; bless them that curse you, do 
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that 
despitefully use you and persecute you; that ye may 
be the children of your Father Which is in heaven. 
For He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the 
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the un- 
just. 





THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 115 


Che Thirteenth Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: Good works 


The Collect 


GRANT us, O Lord, to hold fast within our hearts 
Thy love, which doth always prevent and follow 
us; that so, loving Thee above all things, we may 
continually be given to all good works, through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of that 
of St. Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians, beginning 
at the first verse. 


I THEREFORE, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech 
you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith 
ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with 
longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; en- 
deavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, 
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and 
Father of all, Who is above all, and through all, and 
in you all. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the seventh chapter of 
that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the six- 
‘teenth verse. 


YE shall know them by their fruits. Do men 
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even 
_so, every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but 
a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A 
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can 
a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Wherefore by 


116 FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


ee 
their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that 
saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the king- 
dom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of My 
Father Which is in heaven. Many will say to Me, 
Lord, Lord, have we. not prophesied in Thy Name? 
and in Thy Name have cast out devils ? and in Thy 
Name done many wonderful works? Then’ will I 
profess unto them: I never knew you; depart from 
Me, ye that work iniquity. Therefore whosoever 
heareth these sayings of Mine and doeth them, I 
will liken him unto a wise man, which built his 
house upon a rock; and the rain descended, and the 
floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon 
that house; and it fell not, for it was founded upon 
a rock. But everyone that heareth these sayings of 
Mine and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a 
foolish man which built his house upon the sand; 
and. the rain descended, and the floods. came, and 
the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and, it 
fell; and great was the fall of it... : 





The Fourteenth Sunday after Trinity 
ie en Intent: Renewal of Heart 


i i=: The Collect y : 


O GOD, Who in Thy lovingkindness hast appointed 
for us a ministry of reconciliation, that by it our feet 
may be restored to the path wherein we should walk; 
grant us that, firmly resisting all temptation, we 
may follow that path unto its glorious end in Thee, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


“he Epistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
First Epistle General of St. John, beginning at the 
first verse. i 
THAT which was from the beginning, which we 
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, 


| 








FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 117 


which we have looked upon, and our hands have 
handled, of the Word of life (for the life was mani- 
fested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and 
show unto you that eternal life, which was with the 
Father, and was manifested unto us); that which 
we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that 
ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our 
fellowship is with the Father, and with His. Son Jesus 
Christ.. If we say that we have no sin, we' deceive 


ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess 


our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive ‘us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 
These things write we unto you, that ‘your joy may 
be full. This then is the message which we have 
heard of Him, and declare unto you, that God is 
Light, and in Him is no darkness at all. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the ninth clantos of 
that according to St. Matthew, begmanive at the second 
verse. 


THEY brought to Him a man sick of the palsy, 
lying on a, bed; and Jesus, seeing their faith, said 
unto the sick of the palsy: Son, be of good cheer; 
thy sins be forgiven thee. But certain of the 
scribes said within themselves: This. man blasphem- 
eth. - And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said: 
Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? For whe- 
ther is easier, to say: Thy sins be forgiven thee, or 
to say: Arise and walk ? But that ye may know that 
the Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive 
sins (then saith He to the sick of the palsy): Arise, 
take up thy bed, and go into thy house. And he 


‘ arose and departed to his house. And when the 


multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God, 
which had given such power unto men. 


418 FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


Che Hifteenth Sunday after Trinity 
Intent: The Reality of Things Eternal; a day of devo- 
tion to the Holy Spirit 


The Collect 


O HOLY Spirit, the Comforter of all that trust 
in Thee, without Whom nothing is strong, nothing is 
holy; increase and multiply within us Thy heavenly 
wisdom; that, Thou being our Ruler and Guide, we 
may so pass through things temporal as never to lose 
sight of the things eternal, and may ever live in the 
service of Christ our holy Lord, Who with Thee and 
the Almighty Father liveth and reigneth One God 
for evermore. KR. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of the 
Second Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the fourteenth verse. 


HE Who raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise us up 
also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For 
all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace 
might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound 
to the glory of God. For which cause we faint not; 
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward 
man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, 
which is but for 2 moment, worketh for us a far more 
exceeding weight of glory, while we look not at the 
things which are seen; for the things which are seen 
are temporal; but the things which are not seen are 
eternal. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the tenth chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the twenty- 
fifth verse. 

A CERTAIN lawyer stood up saying: Master, what 
shall I do to inherit eternal life? Jesus said unto 


s 


SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 119 


him: What is written in the law? How readest 
thou? And he answering said: Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy 
mind; and thy neighbour as thyself. Jesus said unto 
him: Thou hast answered right; this do and thou 
shalt live. But he, willing to justify himself, said 
unto Jesus: And who is my neighbour? And Jesus 
answering said: A certain man went down from 
Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among thieves, which 
stripped him of his raiment and wounded him, and 
departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance 
there came down a certain priest that way; and when 
he saw him, he passed by on the other side. Like- 
wise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and 
looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But 
a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he 
was; when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and 
went to him and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil 
and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought 
him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the 
morrow when he departed, he took out two pence 
and gave them to the host, and said unto him: Take 
care of him; and whatever thou spendest more, when 
I come again I will repay thee. Which now of these 
three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that 
fell among the thieves? And the lawyer said: He 
that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto 
him: Go, and do thou likewise. 





Che Sixteenth Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: Justice 


The Collect 


O GOD, in Whom is no variableness, neither shadow 
of turning; we lean upon Thy justice as upon a pillar 
of Thy throne; we thank and bless Thee for Thy holy 
Law that changeth not, and pray for wisdom that 


420 SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


qmder it we may live according to Thy will, Who 
livest and reignest, Father, Son and Spirit, one -God 
for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


‘The Epistle is taken from the sixth chapter of the 
Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Galatians, be- 
ginning at the fourth verse. 


LET every man prove his own work, for every 
man shall bear his own burden. Be not deceived; 
God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man soweth, 
that shall he also reap. He that soweth to his flesh 
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth 
to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. 
Let us not be weary in‘well-doing, for in due season 
we ‘shall reap, if we faint not. As we have oppor- 
tunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto 
them who are of the household of faith. As many as 
walk according to this rule, peace be on them and 
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. : 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifth chapter of 
that according to St. John, _ beginning at the twenty- 
fifth verse. 


AMEN, Amen, I say unto you, the hour is coming, 
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God; and they that hear shall live. For as 
the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given 
to the Son to have life in.Himself, and hath given 
Him authority to execute judgment also, because He 
is the Son of Man. Marvel not at this; for the hour 
is coming in which all that are in the graves shall 
hear His voice and shall come forth: they that have 
“done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that 
‘have done evil unto the resurrection of’ condemnation. 
‘As-I ‘hear, I judge, and My judgment is just; for the 


SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 121 


Son of Man shall come in the glory of His Father with 
His Angels, and then shall He reward every man ac- 
cording to his works. 


Che Senenteenth ce after ‘Trinity | 


Intent: Eternal Progress 


The Collect 
ALMIGHTY God and loving Father, of Whose only 
gift it cometh that Thy faithful people do unto Thee 
true and laudable service; grant, we pray Thee, that 
we may so loyally serve Thee in this life that we may 
be numbered among Thy leal and trusty soldiers in 
all lives to come, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle | cua 
‘The Epistle is'taken’ from the sixth chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to Timothy, 
beginning at the sixth verse. 


GODLINESS with contentment is great gain; for 
we, brought nothing into this world, and it is certain 
that we can carry nothing out; so, having food and 
raiment, let us be therewith content. For they that 
will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into 
many foolish and hurtful lusts, ‘which drown men in 
destruction and perdition. For the love of money 
is the root of all evil, which some having coveted, 
they have erred from the faith and pierced them- 
selves through with many sorrows. But thou, O man 
of God, flee these things, and follow after righteous- 
ness, godliness, faith, love, patience,'meekness. Fight 
the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, 
whereunto thou art also called. I give thee charge in 
the sight of God, that thou keep this commandment 
without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Who is the blessed and only Po- 
tentate, King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to Whom 
be honour and power everlasting. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


122 EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eleventh chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
seventh verse. : 


JESUS began to say unto the multitudes concerning 
John: What went ye out into the wilderness to see ? 
A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye 
out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment ? Be- 
hold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings’ 
houses. But what went ye out for to see? A pro- 
phet ? Yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. 
For this is he of whom it is written: Behold, I 
send My messenger before thy face, which shall pre- 
pare thy way before thee. Amen, I say unto you, 
among them that are born of women there hath not 
risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstand- 
ing, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is 
greater than he. And from the days of John the 
Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence, and the violent take it by force. For 
all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. 
And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was 
for to come. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 





Che Eighteenth Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: CHRIST as Truth 


The Collect 


O LORD Christ, Who art the Way, the Truth and 
the Life, grant that we may find strength to be true 
in thought, word and deed, that so we may reach Thee, 
the eternal Truth, to Whom be honour and glory for 
evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of that 
of St. Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians, beginning at 
the seventh verse, 


EHIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 123 


UNTO every one of us is given grace according to 
the measure of the gift of Christ, till we all come 
- in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the 
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure 
of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we hence- 
forth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and 
carried about with every wind of doctrine, but speak- 
ing the truth in love, may grow up into Him in all 
things, which is the head, even Christ; from Whom 
the whole body fitly joined together and compacted 
by that which every joint supplieth, according to 
the effectual working in the measure of every part, 
maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of 
itself in love. Wherefore putting away lying, speak 
every man truth with his neighbour; for we are mem- 
bers one of another. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourteenth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the first 
verse. 


LET not your heart be troubled; ye believe in 
God, believe also in Me. In My Father’s house are 
many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told 
you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I 
go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, 
and receive you unto Myself; that where I am, there 
ye may be also. And whither I go ye know, and 
the way ye know. Thomas saith unto Him: Lord, 
we know not whither Thou goest; and how can we 
know the way? Jesus saith unto Him: I am the 
way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the 
Father, but by Me. If ye had known Me, ye should 
have known My Father also; and from henceforth 
ye know Him, and have seen Him. Philip saith unto 
» Him: Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us. 
Jesus said unto him: Have I been so long time with 
you, and yet hast thou not known Me, Philip? He 
that hath seen Me hath seen the Father. 


124 NINETEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 
Che Nineteenth Sunday after 7 Trinity 


Intent: Tact and Tolerance 


The Collect 


O GOD, Who meetést every man upon that path 
by which he draweth nigh unto Thee, grant us such 
a measure of Thy wisdom that by our love and gen- 
tleness the wandering sheep be guided to Thy fold, 
through Christ our holy Lord. - R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the ninth chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians, 
beginning at the nineteenth verse. 


THOUGH I be free from all men, yet have I made 
myself servant unto all, that I might gain the more. 
Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I: might 
gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as 
under the law, that I might gain them that are un- 
der the law; to them that are without law, as with- 
out law (being not without law to God, but under 
the law to Christ), that I might gain them that are 
without law. To the weak became I as weak, that I 
might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, 
that. I might by all means save some. And this I do 
for the gospel’s sake, that I might be partaker thereof 
with you. Know ye not that they which run in a race 
run all, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye 
may obtain. And every man that striveth for the 
mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do-it to 
obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible. 
I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not 
as one that beateth the air. But I keep under my 
body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any 
means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


| 


_TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 125 


The Gospel REY 


~The holy ‘Gospel is taken from the tenth chapter of 
that Bo ad to St. John, beginning at the seventh 
verse, 


“THEN said J esus, unto chem again: Amen, Amen, 
I say unto you, I.am the door of the sheep. By Me if 
any: man enter in, he shall be saved, and-shall go in 
and .out, and. find pasture. I am come that. they 
might have, life, and that they might have it more 
abundantly. . I am the good shepherd; the good shep- 
herd giveth his life for the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is an hireling, and careth not for the 
sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, 
and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, 
even so know I the Father; and I lay down My life 
for the sheep. And other sheep I have which are 
not of this fold; ‘them also I must''bring, and they 
shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and 


one shepherd. 


The Twentieth Sunday after asi 


daten: Serenity 


‘The C ollect 


UNCHANGING ‘and immortal God, Who reignest 
for ever serene: above the waterfloods, grant us, to 
gain and hold that holy peace which naught on earth 
can, Vex, through Christ the. Prince of Peace, ‘Who 
liveth with Thee and the Holy Ghost, One God for 
evermore. _R. Amen. 


' The Epistle 


The , Epistle is taken from the frst chapter’ of thé 
Second Epistle General of St. Peter, beginning at the 
fifth. verse. 





126 TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


GIVING all diligence, add to your faith virtue, 
and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temper- 
ance; and to temperance patience; and to patience 
godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and 
to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things 
be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall 
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. But, beloved, be not ignor- 
ant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord 
as is a thousand years, and a thousand years as one 
day. What manner of persons then ought ye to be in 
all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and 
hasting unto the coming of the day of God? 
Therefore, beloved, beware lest, being led away with 
the error of the wicked, ye fall from your own stead- 
fastness. But grow in grace and in the knowledge of 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to Whom be 
glory now and for ever. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eleventh chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
twenty-eighth verse. 


COME unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon 
you, and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in 
heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My 
yoke is easy and My burden is light. That it might be 
fulfilled which was spoken of Esaias the prophet, 
saying: Behold My servant, Whom I have chosen; 
My beloved, in Whom My soul is well pleased; I will 
put My Spirit upon Him, and He shall show judg- 
ment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive nor cry, 
neither shall any man hear His voice in the street. 
A bruised reed shall He not break, and smoking flax 
shall He not quench, till He send forth judgment unto 
victory; and in His Name shall the Gentiles trust. 





TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 127 


Che Gmenty-first Sunday after Trinity 


Intent: Perseverance 


The Collect 


LORD of all power and might, Who art the author 
and giver of all good things, may our hearts be so 
filled with gratitude to Thee that we may continually 
increase in true religion, and from Thine omnipotence 
may we draw strength to persevere, through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the sixth chapter of the 
Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians, be- 
ginning at the tenth verse. 


MY brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the 
power of His might. Put on the whole armour of 
God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles 
of the adversary. For we wrestle not against flesh 
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, 
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in high places. Where- 
fore take unto you the whole armour of God, that 
ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and 
having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having 
your loins girt about with truth, and having on the 
breastplate of righteousness, and your feet shod with 
the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, 
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take 
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word of God, watching thereunto with all 
perseverance. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the tenth chapter of 
that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the first 
verse. 


128 TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


WHEN. Jesus had called unto Him His twelve. dis- 
ciples, He gave them power over unclean spirits, to 
cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. And He said unto them: Be- 
hold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; 
be -ye therefore ‘wise .as- serpents,. and. harmless .as 
doves. The disciple is not above his’ Master, nor the 
servant above his lord. .He that'.receiveth you re- 
ceiveth Me, and he that receiveth'Me receiveth Him 
that sent Me. Whosoever shall give to drink unto 
one of these little ones a cup of: cold water only in 
the name of a disciple, Amen I say unto you; he 
shall by no means lose his reward. He that loveth 
father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me; 
and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is 
not worthy of Me. And he that taketh not his cross 
and followeth after Me is not worthy of Me.. He 
that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his 
life for My sake shall find it.. But he that endureth 
to the end shall be saved. 


The Dueniy: serond Sunday after G Trinity 
; Intent: Right Energy. — 


The Collect 


STIR up, O Lord, we pray Thee, the wills of Thy 
faithful people, that they, plenteously bringing forth 
the fruit of good deeds, may become tireless workers 
in Thy holy service, through Christ our Lord. R. 


Amen. PR 
The Rpisile.. «0 as at ea 
The Epistle is taken from the second: sdtiay eat of 


that of St. Paul the Apostle to Titus, beginning at the 
first verse. 


SPEAK thou the things which become sound doc- 
trine, in all things showing thyself ‘a pattern of good 
works; in doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, 
sincerity, sound speech, that cannot be condenined; 


TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 129 


that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, 
having no evil thing to say of you. For the grace of 
God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, 
feaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly 
in this present world, looking for that blessed hope, 
and the glorious appearing of the great God and 
our Saviour Jesus Christ; putting us in mind to be 
subject to principalities and powers, to obey magis- 
trates, to be ready to every good work, to speak 
evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing 
all meekness unto all men. This is a faithful say- 
ing, and these things I will that thou affirm constant- 
ly, that they which have believed in God might be 
eareful to maintain good works. ‘These things are 
good and profitable unto men. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixth chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the twenty- 
seventh verse. 


I SAY unto you which hear: Love your enemies, 
do good to them which hate you, bless them that curse 
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you. 
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye 
also to them likewise. Love ye your enemies, and do 
‘good and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your 
reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children 
of the Highest, for He is kind unto the unthankful 
and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as your 
Father is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not be 
judged; condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned; 
forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall 
be given unto you; good measure, pressed down and 
shaken together, and running over, shall men give 
into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye 
mete withal it shall be measured to you again. 

F 


130 TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 


Che Gwenty-third Sunday after Crinity 
Intent: The Practice of What is Taught. 


The Collect 


ALMIGHTY God, the fountain of all wisdom, we 
pray Thee that the words which we hear this day 
with our outward ears may through Thy grace be so 
grafted inwardly in our hearts that they may bring 
forth in us the fruit of good living, to the honour 
and praise of Thy Name, through Christ our Lord. 


R. Amen. 
The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
General Epistle of St. James, beginning at the nine- 
teenth verse. 


MY beloved brethren, let every man be swift to 
hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; for the wrath of 
man worketh not the righteousness of God. Be ye 
doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your 
own selves. For if any man be a hearer of the word, 
and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his 
natural face in a glass; for he beholdeth himself, and 
goeth his way and straightway forgetteth what man- 
ner of man he was. But whoso looketh into the 
perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein, he 
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, 
this man shall be blessed in his deed. Pure religion 
and undefiled before God and the Father is this: To 
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, 
and to keep himself unspyotted from the world. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 
The holy Gospel is taken from the sixth chapter of 
that according to St. John, beginning at the twenty- 
eighth verse. 
THEN said they unto Jesus: What shall we do, 
that we might work the works of God ? Jesus answer- 
ed and said unto them: This is the work of God, 


TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY 131 





that ye believe on Him Whom He hath sent. For 
the Bread of God is He Which cometh down from 
heaven, and giveth life unto the world. Then said 
they unto Him: tLord, evermore give us this bread. 
And Jesus said unto them: I am the Bread of Life; 
he that cometh to Me shall never hunger; and he 
that believeth on Me shall never thirst. All that the 
Father giveth Me shall come to Me; and him that 
cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out. For this 
is the Father’s will which hath sent Me, that of all 
which He hath given Me I should lose nothing, but 
should raise it up again at the last day. It is the 
spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing; 
the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and 
they are life. 


Che Cwenty-fourth Sunday after Crinity 


Intent: Openness of Mind 


The Collect 


O LORD of Light unquenchable, grant unto Thy 
people that with pure heart and open mind they may 
reverently receive Thy holy Word, truly serving Thee 
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their 
life, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the third chapter of the 
Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians, be- 
ginning at the fourteenth verse. 


FOR this cause I bow my knees unto the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, of Whom the whole family 
in heaven and earth is named, that He would grant 
you, according to the riches of His glory, to be 
strengthened with might by His Spirit in the inner 
man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; 
that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be 
able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, 

F2 


132 THE SUNDAY NEXT BEFORE ADVENT 





and length, and depth, and height; and to know the 
love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye — 
might be filled with all the fullness of God. Now 
unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly 
above all that we ask or think, according to the 
power that worketh in us, unto Him be glory in the 
Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world 
without end. Amen. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the seventh chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the six- 
teenth verse. 


JESUS said: My doctrine is not Mine, but His 
that sent Me. If any man will do His will, he shall 
know of the doctrine whether it be of God. Judge 
not according to the appearance, but judge righteous 
judgment. If any man thirst, let him come unto Me 
and drink. I am the light of the world; he that fol- 
loweth Me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have 
the light of life. If ye continue in My word, then 
are ye My disciples indeed; and ye shall know the 
truth, and the truth shall make you free. 


The Sunday next before Aduent 


Intent: The Dispelling of Ignorance; a day of devo- é 
tion to the Holy Spirit. 


The Collect 


O HOLY SPIRIT, Breath of Life and Fire of Love, 
touch our cold hearts, we pray Thee, with the glow 
of that celestial flame, that by Thine indwelling power 
we may shine forth as the sun to enlighten and 
encourage those our brethren who are lost in the — 
darkness of ignorance, and guide them to Thee, Who, 
with the Father and the Son, art worshipped and 
glorified for ever. R. Amen. 


THE SUNDAY NEXT BEFORE ADVENT = 133 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the seventh chapter of the Book of 
the Prophet Daniel, beginning at the ninth verse. 





DANIEL said: I saw in my vision by night, and 
the Ancient of Days did sit, Whose garment was 
white as snow, and the hair of His head like the 
pure wool; His throne was like the fiery flame, and 
His wheels as burning fire. A. fiery stream issued 
and came forth from before Him; thousand thou- 
sands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times 
ten thousand stood before Him. And behold, one 
like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, 
and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought 
Him near before Him. And there was given Him 
dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all people, 
nations and languages should serve Him; His do- 
minion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not 
pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be 
destroyed. The saints of the most High also shall 
take the kingdom, and possess it for ever and ever. 
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great 
‘Prince which standeth for the children of Thy people; 
and they that be wise shall shine as the brightness 
of the firmament; but they that turn many to right- 
eousness as the stars for ever and ever. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eighth chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the fourth 
verse. 


WHEN much people were gathered together Jesus 
spake unto them by a parable: A sower went out 
to sow his seed; and as he sowed some fell by the 
wayside, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of 
the air devoured it. And some fell upon a rock; and 
as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, be- 
cause it lacked moisture. And some fell among thorns; 


134 THE BAPTISM OF OUR LORD 


and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. 
And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and - 
bare fruit an hundredfold. He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear. And His disciples asked Him: 
What might this parable be? And He said: Unto 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the king- 
dom of God; but to others in parables; that seeing 
they might not see, and hearing, they might not 
understand. The parable is this: The seed 
is the word of God.° Those by the wayside are they 
that hear; then cometh the adversary, and taketh away 
the word out of their hearts, lest they should under- 
stand and be saved. They on the rock are they who, 
when they hear, receive the word with joy; but these 
have no root, which for a while believe, and in time 
of temptation fall away. And that which fell among 
thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go 
forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleas- 
ures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. 
But that on the good ground are they which in an 
honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep 
it, and bring forth fruit with patience. 


If there be more than twenty-five Sundays after 
Trinity, the service of some of those Sundays that were 
omitted after the Epiphany shall be used to supply as 
many as are wanting. And if there be fewer than 
twenty-five Sundays, those that remain over may be 
omitted, provided that this last Collect, Epistle and 


Gospel shall always be used upon the Sunday next before j 
Advent. ; 





Che Baptiom of Our Dord | 


The Collect 
O LORD, Who didst deign as at this time to receive 
the baptism of water at the hands of Thy Fore- 
runner, grant that we may become worthy to receive 
at Thy Hands the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of 
Fire, Thou Who art the Way, the Truth and the 
Life, to Whom be praise for evermore. B. Amen. 


: THE BAPTISM OF OUR LORD 135 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the eleventh chapter of the Book of 
the Prophet Isaiah, beginning at the first verse. 


THERE shall come forth a Rod out of the stem 
of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots; 
and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him, the 
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of 
counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge and of 
reverence to the Lord. He shall not judge after the 
sight of His eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of 
His ears; but with righteousness shall He judge the 
poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the 
earth; and righteousness shall be the girdle of Hig 
loins, and faithfulness tne girdle of His reins. They 
shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain; 
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the 
Lord, as the waters cover the sea. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the third chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
first verse. 


IN those days came John the Baptist, preaching 
in the wilderness of Judea, and saying: Repent ye, 
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. I indeed 
baptize you with water unto repentance; but He that 
cometh after me is mightier than I, Whose shoes I 
am not worthy to bear; He shall baptize you with 
the Holy Ghost and with Fire. Then cometh Jesus 
from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized 
of Him. But John forbad Him, saying: I have 
need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to 
me? And Jesus said unto him: Suffer it to be so 
now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteous- 
ness. Then he suffered Him. And Jesus, when He 
was baptized, went up straightway out of the water; 
and, lo, the heavens were opened unto Him, and He 


136 THE TRANSFIGURATION 





saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and 
lighting upon Him. And, lo, a voice from heaven, ~ 
saying: This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
seven days after. 


Che Cransiguration 
The Collect 


O LORD Christ, Who upon Mount Tabor didst show 
Thyself in Thy true glory unto Thy disciples, grant 
that we Thy humble servants may also in due time 
ascend the holy mountain, and be transfigured into 
Thy likeness, O Thou great King of Glory to Whom 
be praise and adoration for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the first chapter of the 
Second Epistle General of St. Peter, beginning at 
the sixteenth verse. 


We have not followed cunningly devised fables 
when we made known unto you the power and com- 
ing of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses — 
of His majesty. For He received from God the Father 
honour and glory, when there came such a voice to 
Him from the excellent glory: This is My beloved 
Son, in Whom I am well pleased. And this voice 
which came from heaven we heard, when we were 
with Him in the holy mount. We have also a more 
‘sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that 
ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a 
dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star 
arise in your hearts. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


THE PRESENTATION OF OUR LORD 137 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the seventeenth 
chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the first verse. 


JESUS taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, 
and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart, 
and was transfigured before them; and His face did 
shine as the sun, and His raiment was white as the 
light. And behold, there appeared unto them Moses 
and Elias talking with Him. ‘Then said Peter unto 
Jesus: Lord, it is good for us to be here; if Thou 
wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for Thee, 
and one for Moses, and one for Elias. While he yet 
spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them; and 
behold, a voice out of the cloud, which said: This 
is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased; hear 
ye Him. And when the disciples heard it, they fell 
on their faces, and were sore afraid. But Jesus came 
and touched them, and said: Arise, and be not 
afraid. And when they had lifted up their eyes, 
they saw no man save Jesus only. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
seven days after, except on the Festival of the Presen- 
tation of our Lord in the Temple, when the Collect 
alone shall be said after that of the Day. 


Che Presentation of Our Lord in the 
Cemple, or Candlenas 


The Blessing of the Candles 


During the ceremony of the Blessing of the Candles 
no flowers or other objects should stand on the Altar. 
and over the white Altar frontal, which is to be used 
during the Celebration, should be placed another of 
violet. 


138 THE PRESENTATION OF OUR LORD 





The clergy and celebrant in violet vestments and 
the acolytes enter the chancel by the short way and 
take their usual places. The ceremony of the Asperges © 
is then performed. When this ts finished the Priest, 
taking the aspergill, sprinkles the candles which lie upon 
a credence table. He now exorcizes and blesses the 
candles, saying: 


Let these candles be + purified and + blessed by 
Him in Whose honour they shall be burned. 


The Priest blesses some incense, the candles are now — 
censed and afterwards distributed by the Priest to the 
clergy, acolytes and choir. The clergy then group them- 
selves before the Altar and the Priest says: 


Blessed Lord, Who art the Light of the world, 
grant that as on this day we do receive Thee with 
glory in Thine earthly Temple, so may the Light of 
Thy holy Presence ever burn brightly in the Temple 
of our hearts. R. Amen. 


The Priest now turns to the people and, momentarily 
extending his hands, says: 


Let us go forth in peace. 
People. In the Name of the Lord. 


The Procession 


The procession starts and moves through the body of 
the church singing a hymn and passes out into the ves- 
tibule. Here the candles are lighted, and the violet vest- 
ments changed to white. The Priest, wearing a hum- 
eral vetl, takes the monstrance containing the Host 
(which has been taken beforehand to the vestibule, and 
there guarded by a cleric), and the procession enters 
the church singing another hymn. Upon reaching the 
chancel the Altar is dressed, and the violet Altar frontal 
removed, leaving the white in its place; the monstrance 
is then placed on its throne. After the celebrant is 
properly vested the Eucharist begins as usual; it is 
celebrated before the Exposed Sacrament. 


THE PRESENTATION OF OUR LORD 139 


The Collect 


O LORD, who as on this day didst formally pre- 
sent Thy Body in the Temple of Thy Father, grant 
that we too may one day be found worthy to stand 
in His Presence, before the shining Star of Whose 
glory the Angels veil their faces, praising evermore 
Three Persons in One God, throughout all ages of ages. 
R. Amen. 





The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the fortieth chapter of the Book of 
the Prophet Ezekiel, beginning at the fourth verse. 


AND it was said unto me: Son of man, behold 
with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set 
thine heart upon all that I shall show thee; for to 
the intent that I might show them unto thee art thou 
brought hither. And he brought me to the gate of 
the Temple, the gate that looketh toward the east. 
And behold, the glory of God came from the way of 
the east; and His Voice was like the voice of many 
waters, and the earth shone with His glory; and I 
fell upon my face. And the glory of the Lord came 
into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect 
is toward the east. So the Spirit took me up and 
brought me into the inner court; and behold, the 
glory of the Lord filled the whole house, and I heard 
Him speaking unto. me. And He said unto me: Son 
of man, the place of My throne shall be holy, where 
I will dwell in the midst of My children for ever; 
the whole limit thereof round about shall be most 
holy; behold, this is the law of the house. And again 
I fell upon my face before the glory of the Lord. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the second chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the twenty- 
second verse. 





140 ST. DAVID’S DAY 





AND when the days of her purification according 
to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought 
Him to Jerusalem to present Him to the Lord. And 
behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name 
was Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, 
waiting fer the consolation of Israel; and the Holy 
Ghost was upon him. And it was revealed unto him 
by the Holy Ghost that he should not see death before 
he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And he came by the 
Spirit into the Temple; and when the parents brought 
in the child Jesus, to do for Him after the custom of 
the law, then took he Him up in his arms, and blessed 
God, and said: Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant 
depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine 
eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast pre- 
pared before the face of all people, to be a light to 
lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of Thy 
people Israel. And Joseph and His mother marvelled 
at those things which were spoken of Him. 


St. Danid’s Bay 


The Collect 


WE praise Thee, O Lord, for the example and as- 
sistance given to us by St. David, and we pray Thee 
ever to bless with Thy love and protection the land 
of which he is the Patron, through Christ our Lord, 
Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy 
Ghost, throughout all ages of ages. BR. Amen. 


The Epistle and Gospel shall be the same as those 
appointed for the Feast of St.- George. 





St. Patrick's Bay 


The Collect 
Oo ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, Who didst 
give to Thy holy Apostle St. Patrick grace truly to 
believe and to preach Thy Word; grant unto Thy 


ST. PATRICK’S DAY 141 





holy Church to love that Word which he believed, 

and both to preach and receive the same; through 
Christ our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee 
and the Holy Ghost, ever One God throughout all 
ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Seripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the sixty-first chapter of the Book of the 
Prophet Isaiah, beginning at the first verse. 


THE Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 
the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto 
the meek. He hath sent me to bind up the broken- 
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and the 
opening of the prison to them that are bound; to 
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and to com- 
fort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn 
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy 
for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of 
heaviness; that they might be called trees of right- 
eousness, the planting of the Lord, that He might be 
glorified. And ye shall be named the priests of the 
Lord; men shall call you the ministers of our God. 
Behold, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord; I shall be 
joyful in my God; for He hath clothed me with the 
garments of salvation. He hath covered me with the 
robe of righteousness as a bridegroom decketh him- 
self with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself 
with her jewels. For as the earth bringeth forth her 
bud and as the garden causeth the things that are 
sown in it to spring forth, so the nord God will cause 
righteousness and praise to spring forth before all 
the nations. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 
The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-second 
chapter of that according to St. Luke, Destning at 
the twenty-fifth verse. 
AND He said unto them: The Kings of the Gentiles 
exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise 








142 THE ANNUNCIATION OF OUR LADY 


authority upon them are called benefactors. But 
ye shall not be so; he that is greatest among 
you, let him be as the younger; and he that 
is chief as he that doth serve; for I am among 
you as he that serveth. Go ye therefore and teach 
all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father 
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them 
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you; and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the 
consummation of the age. 





Che Anunuuriation of Our Lady 


The Collect 


WE thank Thee, O God, for that most sweet and 
laudable pattern set before us by the holy Lady Mary, 
mother of Jesus, whom Thy holy Church hath ever 
held up unto her people as a bright ensample of 
purity and godly life; and we pray that on this the 
Festival of her Annunciation there may shine forth 
within us the light of ever-growing purity and holi- 
hess, through Christ our Lord. BR. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the seventh chapter of the Book of 
the Prophet Isaiah, beginning at the fourteenth verse, 


THE Lord Himself shall give you a sign: Behold, 
a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall 
call His Name Emmanuel. And it shall be said: 
The people that walked in darkness have seen a 
great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow 
of death, upon them hath the light shined. For unto 
us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; and the 
government shall be upon His Shoulder; and His 
Name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The 
Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of 
Peace. Of the increase of His government and peace 


ST. GEORGE’S DAY 143 


there shall be no end, upon the throne of David and 
upon his kingdom, to order it and to establish it with 
judgment and with justice from henceforth even for 


~ANEE Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the first. chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the twenty- 
sixth verse. 


AND in the sixth month the Angel Gabriel was sent 
from God unto a city of Galilee named Nazareth, to 
a Virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, 
of the house of David; and the Virgin’s name was 
Mary. And the Angel came in unto her, and said: 
Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women. And when she 
saw him she was troubled at his saying, and cast in 
her mind what manner of salutation this should be. 
And the Angeli said unto her: Fear not, Mary; for 
thou hast found favour with God. And behold, thou 
shalt bring forth a Son, and shalt call His name 
Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son 
of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto Him 
the throne of His father David. And He shall reign 
over the house of Jacob for ever; and of His kingdom 
there shall be no end. The Holy Ghost shall come 
upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall over- 
shadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. 
And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord; 
be it unto me according to thy word. 





St. George's Bay 


The Collect 


WE praise Thee, O Lord, for the example and as- 
sistance given to us by Thy holy Martyr St. George; 
and we pray Thee ever to bless with Thy love and 
protection the land of which he is the Patron, through 





“TLE P= STC HOR GZS aiken 


Christ our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee 
and the Holy Ghost, throughout all ages of ages. 


R. Amen, 
The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the third chapter of the Book of the 
Wisdom of Solomon, beginning at the first verse. 


IHE souls of the righteous are in the hand of 
God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the 
sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their de- 
parture is taken for misery, and their going from 
us to be utter destruction; but they are in peace. 
For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet 
is their hope full of immortality. And having been 
a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded; 
for God proved them, and found them worthy for 
Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them, 
and received them as a burnt offering. They shall 
judge the nations, and have dominion over the peo- 
ple, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put 
their trust in Him shall understand the truth, and 
such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him; for 
grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care 
for His elect. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixteenth chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
twenty-fourth verse. 


THEN said Jesus unto His disciples: If any man 
will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross, and follow Me. For whosoever will save 
his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life 
for My sake shall find it. For what is a man profited, 
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own 
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his 
soul? For the Son of Man shall come in the glory 
of His Father with His Angels; and then He shall 
reward every man according to his works. 





;: EMPIRE DAY 145 


Empire Day 
The Collect 


We thank Thee, O most mighty Lord, for this great 
Empire which Thy hands have builded; may we who 
love it labour to uphold its honour by nobility of life, 
each seeking not advantage for himself, but working 
with true heart and fervent zeal to aid the common 
good, that peace and brotherhood may reign through- 
out the world; through Christ our Holy Lord. R. 


Amen, 
The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the twelfth chapter of 
the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Cor- 
inthians, beginning at the twelfth verse. 

As the body is one and hath many members, and all 
the members of that body, being many, are one body; 
so also is Christ. For by one Spirit we are all bap- 
tized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, 
whether we be bond or free, and-have been all made 
to drink into one Spirit. For the body is not one 
member, but many; and the eye cannot say unto the 
hand: I have no need of thee; nor again the head to 
the feet; I have no need of you, There should be no 
schism in the body, but the members should have the 
same care one for another. And where one member 
suffers, all the members suffer with it; or one member 
be honoured, all the members rejoice with it. Now 
ye are the body of Christ and members in particular. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The Holy Gospel is taken from the first chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the sixty- 
eighth verse. 

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for He hath vis- 
ited and redeemed His people, and hath raised up a 
mighty salvation for us in the house of His servant 
David, as He spake by the mouth of His holy Pro- 











146 ST. ALBAN’S DAY 


phets, which have been since the world began: that 
we should be saved from our enemies and from the 
hands of all that hate us, to perform the mercy pro- 
mised to our forefathers, and to remember His holy 
Covenant; to perform the oath which He sware to our 
forefather Abraham, that He would give us that we, 
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might 
serve Him without fear in holiness and righteousness 
before Him, all the days of our life. And thou, child, 
shalt be called the prophet of the Highest, for thou 
shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His 
ways; to give knowledge of salvation unto His people 
for the remission of their sins, through the tender 
mercy of our God, whereby the day-spring from on 
high hath visited us, to give light to them that sit in 
darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide 
our feet into the way of peace. 





St. Albans Bay 


The Collect 


WE praise Thee, O Lord, for the example and 
assistance given to us by Thy holy Martyr St. Alban; 
and we pray Thee ever to bless with Thy love and 
protection the land in which he was the first to die 
for Christ’s sake; through the same Christ our Lord. 
R. Amen. 


In countries where the Liberal Catholic Church has 
adopted St. Alban as tts Patron, the following Collect 
shall be substituted for the foregoing: 


We praise Thee, O Lord, for the example and as- 
sistance given to us by Thy holy Martyr St. Alban, 
the Patron of our Church, and we pray Thee that under 
his protection Thy Church in this land may continu- 


ally serve Thee in all good works, through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle and Gospel shall be the same as those 
appointed for the Feast of St. George. 


ST. JOHN BAPTIST’S DAY 147 


St. Juhu Baptist’s Bay 
The Collect 


O CHRIST our Lord, Who as at this time sentest 
forth Thy servant John the Baptist to prepare Thy 
way before Thee; accept us now, we pray Thee, un- 
worthy though we be, as heralds of Thy glorious 
Coming, that by devotion, steadfastness, and gentle- 
ness we too may win men’s hearts to Thee, Whom we 
confess as Lord and Master, now and evermore. R. 


Amen. 
The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the fortieth chapter of the Book of the 
Prophet Isaiah, beginning at the third verse. 


THE voice of him that crieth in the wilderness: 
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the 
desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall 
be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made 
low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and 
the rough places plain. And the glory of the Lord 
_ shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: 
for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. The 
grass withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word of 
our God shall stand for ever. Behold, the Lord God 
will come with strong hand, and His arm: shall rule 
for Him: behold, His reward is with Him, and His 
work before Him. He shall feed His flock like a 
shepherd; He shall gather the lambs with His arm, 
and carry them in His bosom, and shall gently lead 
those that are with young. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the first chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the sixty- 
eighth verse. ? 

BLESSED be the Lord God of Israel, for He hath 
visited and redeemed His people, and hath raised up 


148 ST. PETER AND THE HOLY APOSTLES 


a mighty salvation for us in the house of His servant 
David; as He spake by the mouth of His holy pro- 
phets, which have been since the world began; that 
we should be saved from our enemies, and from the 
hands of all that hate us; to perform the mercy pro- 
mised to our forefathers, and to remember His holy 
covenant; that we, being delivered out of the hands 
of our enemies, might serve Him without fear, in 
holiness and righteousness before Him, all the days 
of our life. And thou, child, shalt be called the 
Prophet of the Highest, for thou shalt go before the 
face of the Lord to prepare His ways; to give know- 
ledge of salvation unto His people for the remission 
of their. sins, through the tender mercy of our God, 
whereby the day-spring from on high hath visited us; 
to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in 
the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the. 
way of peace. 


St. Peter and the Holy Apostles 


The Collect 


WE thank Thee, Lord, for the teaching and example 
of Thy holy Apostles, and we pray that those to whom 
their wondrous power has descended may ever be filled 
with Thy wisdom and Thy love, that under their 
firm guidance Thy holy Church may ever joyfully 
serve the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One God for 
evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the twelfth chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the fifth verse. 

PETER therefore was kept in prison; but prayer 
was made without ceasing of the Church unto God 
for him. The same night Peter was sleeping between 
two soldiers, bound with two chains; and the keepers 
before the. door kept the prison. And behold, the 
Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined 


ST. PETER AND THE HOLY APOSTLES 149 


in the prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and 
raised him up, saying: Arise up quickly. And his 
chains fell off from his hands. And the Angel said 
unto him; Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals; and 
so he did. And he saith unto him: Cast thy gar- 
ment about thee, and follow me. And he went out 
and followed him, and wist not that it was true which 
was done by the Angel, but thought he saw a vision. 
When they were past the first and the second ward, 
they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the 
city, which opened to them of his own accord; and 
they went out, and passed on through one street, and 
forthwith the Angel departed from him. And when 
Peter was come to himself, he said: Now I know of 
a surety that the Lord hath sent His Angel, and 
hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from 
all the expectation of the people of the Jews. 
Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the sixteenth chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
thirteenth verse. 

WHEN Jesus came into the coasts of Czsarea 
Philippi, He asked His disciples, saying: Whom do 
men say that I, the son of Man, am? And they said: 
Some say that Thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, 
and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He 
saith unto them: But whom say ye that I am? And 
Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art Christ, 
the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and 
said unto him: Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona; 
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, 
but My Father Which is in heaven. And I say also unto 
thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will 
build My Church;*and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the 
keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou 
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and 
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed 
in heaven. 


150 THE ASSUMPTION OF OUR LADY 





Che Assumption of Our Lady 
The Collect 


O LORD Christ, Who for her wondrous humility 
and purity hast exalted the holy Lady Mary among 
the hosts of heaven; grant that we, Thy people, may 
so follow that her most noble example, that we may 
at the latter end be found worthy to serve Thee even 
as do Thy holy Angels, Thou Who livest and reignest 
in glory for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the ninth chapter of the Book of the 
Wisdom of Solomon, beginning at the first verse. 


O GOD of my fathers, Who hast made all things 
with Thy word, give me wisdom, that sitteth by Thy 
throne, and reject me not from among Thy children. 
For though a man be never so perfect among the 
children of men, yet if Thy wisdom be not with him, 
he shall be nothing regarded. For wisdom was with 
Thee, which knoweth Thy works, and was present 
when Thou madest the world, and knew what was 
acceptable in Thy sight, and right in Thy command- 
ments. O send her out of Thy holy heavens, and 
from the throne of Thy glory, that being present, she 
may labour with me, that I may know what is pleas-. 
ing unto Thee. For she knoweth and understandeth 
all things, and she shall lead me soberly in my do- 
ings, and preserve me in her power; so shall my works 
be acceptable. For who can think what the will of 
the Lord is, and Thy counsel who hath known, except 
Thou give wisdom, and send Thy Holy Spirit from 
above ? So the ways of them which lived on the 
earth were reformed, and men were taught the things 
that are pleasing unto Thee, and were saved through 
wisdom. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


THE NATIVITY OF OUR LADY 151 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the first chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the twenty- 
sixth verse. 


AND in the sixth month the Angel Gabriel was 
sent from God unto a city of Galilee named Nazareth, 
to a Virgin espoused to a man whose name was 
Joseph, of the house of David; and the Virgin’s name 
was Mary. And the Angel came in unto her, and 
said: Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord 
is with thee; blessed art thou among women. And 
when she saw him she was troubled at his saying, 
and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this 
should be. And the Angel said unto her: Fear not, 
Mary; for thou hast found favour with God. And be- 
hold, thou shalt bring forth a Son, and shalt call His 
name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called 
the Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give 
unto Him the throne of His father David. And He 
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of 
His kingdom there shall be no end. The Holy Ghost 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest 
shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son 
of God. And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of 
the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
seven days after. 


Che Natinity of Our Lady 


The Collect 


WE thank Thee, O God, for that most sweet and 
laudable pattern set before us by the holy Lady 
Mary, mother of Jesus, whom Thy holy Church hath 
ever held up unto her people as a bright ensample of 
purity and godly life; and we pray that on this the 


152 THE NATIVITY OF OUR LADY 





Festival of her Nativity there may shine forth with- 
in us the light of ever-growing purity: and holiness, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the eighth chapter of the Book of the 
Wisdom of Solomon, beginning at the first verse. 


WISDOM reacheth from one end of the world to 
the other; mightily and sweetly doth she order all 
things. In that she is conversant with God, she 
hath magnified her nobility; yea, the Lord of all 
things Himself loved her. Fer she is privy to the 
mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a lover of 
His works. If riches be a possession to be desired 
in this life, what is richer than wisdom, that worketh 
all things ? And if prudence work, who of all that 
are is a more cunning worker than she ? If a man 
love righteousness, her labours are virtues; for she 
teacheth temperance and prudence, justice and forti- 
tude, than which men can have nothing more profit- 
able in their life. By means of her I shall obtain 
immortality, for she is the mother of fair love, and 
of patience and perseverance, and of holy hope. Thou 
shalt put her on as a robe of honour, and shalt put 
her about thee as a crown of joy. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the first chapter of 
that according to St. Luke, beginning at the thirty- 
ninth verse. 


MARY arose in those days, and went into the hill 
country, into a city of Juda, and entered into the 
house of Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth. And it 
came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the salutation 
of Mary, she was filled with the Holy Ghost, and she 


ST. MICHAEL AND ALL ANGELS 153 





spake out with a loud voice, and said: Blessed art 
thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy 
womb. Whence is this to me, that the mother of my 
Lord should come to me? For lo! as soon as the voice 
of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe 
leaped in my womb for joy. Blessed is she that be- 
lieveth; for there shall be a performance of those 
things which were told her from the Lord. And 
Mary said: My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my 
spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. For He hath 
regarded the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
For He that is mighty hath magnified me; and holy 
is His Name. 


St. Michael and all Angels 


The Collect 


ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, with all our 
hearts we praise Thee for the great glory of Thy 
most holy Angels; we thank Thee for their wonderful 
wisdom, their supreme strength, their radiant beauty; 
and, as their resistless power is used always and 
utterly in Thy service, so may we, following zealous- 
ly their resplendent example, devote ourselves wholly 
to the helping of our brethren, through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the seventh and eighth chapters of the 
Revelation of St. John the Divine. 


I SAW the seven Angels which stood before God; 
and to them were given seven trumpets. And an- 
other Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a 
golden censer; and there was given unto him much 
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all 
saints upon the golden Altar which was brought be- 


154 ST. MICHAEL AND ALL ANGELS 





fore the throne. And the smoke of the incense, which 
came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up 
before God out of the Angel’s hand. 


And all the Angels stood round about the throne, 
and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell 
before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God, 
saying: Amen; blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be 
unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eighteenth chapter 
of that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
first verse. 


THEN came the disciples unto Jesus, saying: Who 
is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven? And 
Jesus called a little child unto Him, and set him in 
the midst of them, and said: Amen, I say unto you,’ 
except ye be converted, and become as little children, 
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Who- 
soever therefore shall humble himself as this little 
child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 
And whoso shall receive one such little child in My 
Name receiveth Me. But whoso shall offend one of 
these little ones which believe in Me, it were better 
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, 
and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. 
Woe unto the world because of offences; for it must 
needs be that offences come, but woe to that man 
by whom the offence cometh. Take heed that ye 
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto 
you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold 
the face of My Father which is in heaven. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve 
for sia days after, but on the seventh day those of the 
Third Sunday after Trinity shall be used. 


ALL SAINTS’ DAY 155 


All Saint’ Day 


The Collect 


O ALMIGHTY God, Who hast knit together Thy 
servants in one communion and fellowship in the 
mystical body of Thy Son, Christ our Lord; may we 
so follow Thy blessed saints in all virtuous and godly 
living, that we may come to the unspeakable joys 
which Thou hast prepared for those who unfeignedly 
love Thee, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the seventh chapter of the Revelation 
of St. John the Divine, beginning at the ninth verse. 


I BEHELD, and lo, a great multitude, which no 
man could number, of all nations and kindreds, and 
people, and tongues, stood before the throne and be- 
fore the Lamb, clothed with white robes and palms in 
their hands, and cried with a loud voice, saying: 
Salvation to our God Which sitteth upon the throne, 
and unto the Lamb. And all the Angels stood round 
about the throne, and about the elders and the four 
beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, 
and worshipped God, saying: Amen. Blessing, and 
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, 
and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and 
ever, Amen, And one of the elders .said un- 
to me: what are these which are arrayed in 
white robes, and whence came they? These are they 
which came out of great tribulation, and have wash- 
ed their robes, and made them white. Therefore are 
they before the throne of God, and serve Him day 
and night in His Temple; and He that sitteth on the 
throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger 
no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun 
light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which 
is in the midst of thé throne shall feed them, and 


156 ALL SOULS’ DAY 


shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: 
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. 
Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twenty-fifth 
chapter of that according to St. Matthew, beginning 
at the thirty-fourth verse. 


THEN shall the King say unto them on His right 
hand: Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world. For I was an hungred, and ye gave Me 
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink, I was a 
Stranger and ye took Me in, naked and ye clothed 
Me, I was sick and ye visited Me, I was in prison 
and ye came unto Me. Then shall the righteous 
answer Him saying: Lord, when saw we Thee an 
hungred, and fed Thee, or thirsty and gave Thee 
drink ? When saw we Thee a stranger and took Thee 
in, or naked and clothed Thee? Or when saw we 
Thee sick, or in prison, and came unto Thee? And 
the King shall answer and say unto them: Amen, I 
say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one 
of the least of these My brethren, ye have done it 
unto Me. 


The same Collect, Epistle and Gospel shall serve for 
seven days after, except on the Holy Day of All Souls, 
when the Collect alone shall be said after that of the 
Day. 








All Souls’ Bay 


The Collect 


O LORD Christ, Who hast dominion over the living 
and the dead, and dost hold all Thy people in the 
everlasting arms of Thy love, we thank Thee for the 
joyous rest which Thou dost give to those who pass 
through the gateway of death to a fuller life with 
Thee; and we pray Thee that, as Thou didst preach 


Ne eo 


ALL SOULS’ DAY 157 





to the spirits in prison, so may our earnest efforts 
avail to bring refreshment, light and peace to those 
who know Thee not as yet, O Lord of the Living 
Spirit, Who with the Father and the Holy Ghost 
reignest one God for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Epistle 


The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of the 
First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Thessal- 
onians, beginning at the thirteenth verse. 


I WOULD not have you to be ignorant, brethren, 
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow 
not, even as others which have no hope. For if we 
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him; so 
shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort 
one another with these words. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifth chapter of 
that according to St. John, beginning at the twenty- 
fourth verse. 


AMEN, Amen, I say unto you, he that heareth My 
word, and believeth on Him that sent Me, hath ever- 
lasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; 
but is passed from death unto life. Amen, Amen, I 
say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and 
they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life 
in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life 
in Himself, and hath given Him authority to exe- 
cute judgment also, because He is the Son of Man. 
Marvel not at this; they that have done good shall 
come unto the resurrection of life; and they that have 
done evil unto the resurrection of judgment. 


158 ARMISTICE DAY 





Armistice Bay 


The Collect 


O Almighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all 
the world, in Whose hand are power and might which 
none is able to withstand; we bless and magnify Thy 
glorious Name for the great peace and victory which 
Thou didst give us on this most happy day; and we 
pray for wisdom to use the power entrusted to us to 
Thy glory, to the honour of our King and country, 
and to the benefit of all mankind, through Christ our 
Holy Lord. R. Amen, 


The Epistle 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the twenty-second chapter of the second 
book of the Prophet Samuel, beginning at the second 
verse. 


The Lord is my rock, my fortress and my deliverer, 
the God of my rock, in Him will I trust; He is my 
shield, my high tower and my refuge. In my distress 
I called upon the Lord; He delivered me from my 
strong enemy, and from them that hated me. The 
Lord was my stay, and He brought me forth also into 
a large place. Thou art my lamp, O Lord; the Lord 
will lighten my darkness. His way is perfect; the 
word of the Lord is tried; He is a buckler to all that 
trust in Him; He is my strength and my power. Thou, 
O Lord, hast given me the shield of Thy salvation, 
and Thy gentleness hath made me great. Thou hast 
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against 
me; Thou hast delivered me from the violent man; for 
the Lord wrought a great victory that day. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twelfth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the twenty- 
third verse. 


ST. ANDREW’S DAY 159 





Jesus said: The hour is come that the Son of Man 
should be glorified. Amen, Amen, I say unto you: 
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, 
it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much 
fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he 
that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto 
life eternal. If any man serve Me, let him follow 
Me: and where I am, there shall also My servant be. 
And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all 
men unto Me. 


St. Andrew's Bay 
The Collect 


WE praise Thee, O Lord, for the example and as- 
sistance given to us by Thy holy Martyr St. Andrew, 
and we pray Thee ever to bless with Thy love and 
protection the land of which he is the Patron, through 
Christ our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee 
and the Holy Ghost, throughout all ages of ages. R. 
Amen. 

The Epistle and Gospel shall be same as _ those 
appointed for the Feast of St. George. 





Connon of Saints 


The Collect 


WE thank Thee, Lord, and praise Thee for the en- 
couragement which Thou hast given us by the example 
of Thy holy Saint). eases oe: , and we pray for wis- 
dom and for strength from Thy most Holy Spirit to 
serve Thee even as he did serve, Thou Who with 
the Father livest and reignest in glory in the unity 
of the same Holy Spirit, one God throughout all ages 
of ages. R. Amen. 

The Epistle 

The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the forty-second chapter of the Book of 
the Prophet Isaiah, beginning at the first verse. 


160 COMMON OF SAINTS 





BEHOLD My servant whom I uphold; Mine elect, 
in whom My soul delighteth; I have put My Spirit 
upon him, and he shall bring forth judgment to My 
people. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the 
smoking flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth 
judgment unto truth. He shail not fail nor be dis- 
couraged, till he have set judgment in the earth, and 
the isles shall wait for his law. I the Lord have call- 
ed thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, 
and will keep thee, and give thee for a light of the 
Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring cut the 
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in dark- 
ness out of the prison-house. I will lead them in 
paths that they have not known; I will make dark- 
ness light before them, and crooked things straight. 
These things will I do unto them, and not forsake 
them. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifth chapter of 
that according to St. Matthew, beginning at the 
second verse. 


JESUS taught His disciples, saying: Blessed are 
the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be com- 
forted. Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit 
the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and 
thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled. 
Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. 
Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see 
God. Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be 
called the children of God. Blessed are they which are 
persecuted for righteousness’ sake; for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall 
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all man- 
ner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in 
heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which 
were before you. ; 


THE PROPER GRADUALS AND 
PREFACES OF THE SEASON 


CHRISTMAS DAY 


The Gradual for Christmas Day and seven days 
after. 


Unto us a Child is born: unto us a Son is given. 

His Name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor: 
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince 
of Peace. 

Of the increase of His government and peace there 
shall be no end: to establish His kingdom with jus- 
tice for ever and for ever. 

Glory to God in the highest: on earth peace to men 
of good will. 


The Preface for Christmas Day and seven days 
after. 

For by the mystery of the Word made flesh the light 
of Thy glory hath shone anew upon the eyes of our 
mind, and our hearts are filled with love and holy 
joy. Therefore... 


EASTER DAY 


The Gradual for Easter Day and until the 
Feast of the Ascension. 

Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: therefore 
let us keep the feast. 

Not with the old leaven, nor with the leaven of 
malice and wickedness: but with the unleavened bread 
of sincerity and truth. 

Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more: 
death hath no more dominion over Him. 

F 


162 PROPER GRADUALS AND PREFACES 


For in that He died, He died unto sin once: but 
in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. : 

Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead in- 
deed unto sin: but alive unto God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

Christ is risen from the dead: and become the first- 
fruits of them that slept. 

For since by man came death: by man came also 
the resurrection of the dead. 

For as in Adam all die: even so in Christ shall all be 
made alive. 


The Preface for Easter Day and seven days 
after. 

But chiefly are we bound to praise Thee for the 

glorious resurrection of Thy Son Jesus Christ our 

Lord, Who by His mystic death and rising again 


hath given unto us the promise of everlasting life. 
Therefore... ; 


ASCENSION DAY 


The Gradual for Ascension Day and nine days 
after. 


Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, 
ye everlasting doors: and the King of Glory shall 
come in. 


Who is the King of Glory? It is the Lord strong 
and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle. 

Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, 
ye everlasting doors: and the King of Glory shall 
come in. 

Who is the King of Glory ? even the Lord of Hosts, 
He is the King of Glory. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


PROPER GRADUALS AND PREFACES 163 


The Preface for Ascension Day and nine days 
after. 

Through Thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord, Who after His most glorious resurrection 
ascended up above all the heavens; that where He 
| is, thither we might also ascend and, being made 
_partakers of His Godhead, might reign with Him in 
glory. Therefore... 


WHITSUNDAY 


The Gradual for Whitsunday and six days 
after. 





The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the 
waters: and God said, Let there be light; and there 
was light. 

Know ye not that ye are the temple of God: and 
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? 

The Spirit is life, because of righteousness: and 
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are 
the sons of God. 

The Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of 
the Lord is, there is liberty. 


The Preface for Whitsunday and six days 
after. 


Through Jesus Christ our Lord, Who, going up 
above all the heavens, according to His most true 
promise sent forth the Holy Ghost, Which came down 
as at this time from heaven with a sudden great 
sound, as it had been a mighty wind, in the likeness 
of fiery tongues, lighting upon the Apostles, to teach 
them, and to lead them to all truth. Therefore... 

F2 


164 PROPER GRADUALS AND PREFACES 


TRINITY SUNDAY 


The Gradual for Trinity Sunday only. | 

It is the Spirit that beareth witness: because the 
Spirit is truth. 

There are Three that bear record in heaven, the 
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these 
Three are One. 

There are three that bear witness in earth, the 
Spirit, the water, and the blood: and these three 
agree in One. s 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 





The Preface for Trinity Sunday only. 


The words ‘‘holy Father’’ in the ordinary Preface are 
omitted on this occasion. 


Who art one God, one Lord, not in the oneness of 
a single Person only, but in the trinity of one Sub- 
stance; for the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and 
the Holy Ghost Lord; and yet They are not three 
Lords, but One Lord. Therefore . . 





FESTIVALS OF OUR LADY. 


The Gradual for the Festival of the Assump- 
tion of Our Lady and seven days after; also for 
Candlemas, for the Annunciation, and for the 
Natwity of Our Lady. 

Hail, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee: 
blessed art thou among women. 

And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord: © 
be it unto me according to thy word. 


My soul doth magnify the Lord: and my spirit hath © 
rejoiced in God my Saviour. : 


PROPER GRADUALS AND PREFACES — 165 
For He hath regarded: the lowliness of His hand- 


~ maiden. 


For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall 
call me blessed. 

For He that is mighty hath magnified me: and holy 
is His Name. 


The Preface for the Days abovementioned. 


But to-day we chiefly praise Thee for the help and 
the example of the holy Lady Mary, Star of the Sea 
and Mother of our Lord, Queen of the Angels, our 
pattern of humility and purity. Therefore...... 





FESTIVALS OF THE ANGELS. 


The Gradual for the Festival of St. Michael 
and All Angels and seven days after; also for 
the Third Sunday after Trinity. 

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise 
Him and magnify Him for ever. 

To Him all Angels sing aloud: the Heavens and all 
the Powers therein. - 

To Him Cherubim and Seraphim: continually do 
cry: 

Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Hosts. 

O praise the Lord, ye Angels of His, ye that excel 
in strength: ye that fulfil His commandment, and 
hearken unto the voice of His words. 

O praise the Lord, all ye His hosts: ye servants of 
His that do His pleasure. 


The Preface for the Days abovementioned. 


_ For Thou, Who art the King of Angels, Lord of all 
the Hosts of Heaven, hast granted us the aid of these 
Thy radiant servants. Therefore...... 


CREEDS AND ACTS OF FAITH 


The Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed. 

We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, 
Maker of heaven and earth and of all things visible 
and invisible. 

And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the alone-born Son 
of God, begotten of His Father before all ages; God 
of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God, be- 
gotten, not made, being of one Substance with the 
Father, by Whom all things were made. Who for us 
men and for our salvation came down from heaven 
(Here all genuflect in reverence for the mystery of the 
incarnation.) and was incarnate of the Holy Ghost and 
the Virgin Mary, and was made man. (All 
rise again.) And was crucified also for us; 
under Pontius Pilate He suffered, and was buried. 
And the third day He rose again according to the 
Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on 
the right hand of the Father. And He shall come 
again with glory to judge both the quick and the 
dead: Whose Kingdom shall have no end. 

And we believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, the 
Giver of Life, Who proceedeth from the Father and 
the Son, Who with the Father and the Son together 
is worshipped and glorified, Who spake by the Pro- 
phets. And we believe one holy catholic and apos- 
tolic Church. We acknowledge one baptism for the 
remission of sins. And we look for the resurrection of 
the dead} and the life of the world to come. Amen. 


The Original Nicene Creed* 
We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, 
Maker of all things both visible and invisible; 








“This is the original Creed of the Council of Nicea, — 
A.D. 325. The present Creed, called Nicene, which is ; 
given just before this, is the result of later additions, — 
most of which were made, or rather approved, at the 
Council of Constantinople, in A.D. 381. 


CREEDS AND ACTS OF FAITH 167 


And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son of God; be- 
gotten of the Father, alone-born, that is, of the Sub- 
stance of the Father; God of God, Light of Light, 
Very God of Very God, begotten not made, being of 
one Substance with the Father, by Whom all things 
were made, both those in heaven and those in earth; 
Who for us men and for our salvation descended; 
(here all genuflect)was incarnate and was made man, 
(all rise again) suffered, and rose the third day, as- 
cended into the heavens, and cometh to judge the 
quick and the dead; 
yx And in the Holy Ghost. Amen. 


Acts of Faith 
ales 


We believe in one God, the holy and all-glorious 
Trinity, the Three Who yet are One, the Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost, co-equal, co-eternal; 


In God the Father, from Whom do come the worlds 
and all that is therein, seen or unseen; 


And in God the Son most holy, alone-born from His 
Father before all exons; not made, but springing 
forth; being of the Substance of His Father, true 
God from the true God, true Light from the true 
Light, by Whom all forms were made; Who for us 
men came down from heaven, (here all bow low), 
and took the robe of matter(all stand erect again), 
yet riseth thence again in ever greater glory to a 
kingdom without end; 


And in God the Holy Ghost, the Life-giver, spring- 
ing forth also from the Father and the Son, ‘equal 
with Them in glory, Who revealeth Himself through 
His Angels. 


We acknowledge one holy catholic and apostolic 
Church, one communion of the saints, one baptism 
for the demission of sin; we look for the resurrection 
of the dead, and the life of the coming age. Amen. 























168 CREEDS AND ACTS OF FAITH 
i. 


We believe that God is Love, and Power and 


Truth and Light; that perfect justice rules the world; 
that all His sons shall one day reach His Feet, how- 


ever far they stray. We hold the Fatherhood of God, | 


the Brotherhood of man; we know that we do serve 
Him best when best we serve our brother man. So 
shall His blessing rest on us, yx and peace for ever- 
more. Amen, 


U1 


We place our trust in God, the holy and all-glori- 


ous Trinity, Who dwelleth in the Spirit of man. 
We place our trust in Christ, the Lord of love and 
wisdom, first among many brethren, Who leadeth us 


to the glory of the Father, and is Himself the Way, — 


the Truth and the Life. 


We place our trust in the Law of Good which rules 
the world; we strive towards the ancient narrow Path 
that leads to life eternal; we know that we serve 
our Master best when we serve our brother man. So 
shall His power rest upon us, yf and peace for ever- 
more. Amen, 


THE CELEBRATION OF THE 
HOLY EUCHARIST 


COMMONLY CALLED THE MASS 


““Wucharist’? is a Greek word meaning ‘‘thanks- 
giving.’’ The word ‘‘Mass’’ is of uncertain etymo- 
logy; some think the name to be derived from the Latin 
phrase Ite, missa est, with which catechumens or pro- 
bationers are said to have been dismissed in the an- 
cient Church before the chief part of the service—with 
which the Holy Angels are still dismissed at the end 
of it, to fly forth on their glorious errands of mercy 
and blessing. The fact that the term ‘‘Mass’’ has in 
this Liturgy given place to ‘‘Holy Eucharist’’ has no 
doctrinal significance. We have preferred the latter 
title because it expresses more adequately and beauti- 
fully the nature and character of the Service. 


The Holy Eucharist is the central act of Christian 
worship. Designed to help those who take part therein, 
it is intended also to pour out a great flood of spiritual 
power upon the surrounding world at large, and it sum- 
mons the congregation to intelligent and energetic par- 
ticipation in this work. So real is this participation that 
the congregation may expect to feel a great spiritual 
upliftment; indeed, if they have done their work effi- 
ciently, they may experience physical fatigue. But as- 
suredly they will gladly bear this much of inconveni- 
ence for the sake of serving Him. 


The Liturgy of the Holy Eucharist opens with the 
Asperges or sprinkling with consecrated water, whose 
purpose is to prepare the building, to purify and 
steady the thought and feeling of the people, and to 
invoke the presence of an Angel to assist in the wor- 
ship. 

Then follows the Preparation, consisting largely of 
ascription of praise to Almighty God, intended to attune 
the worshippers to high and holy things. This is great- 
ly helped by the Confession and Absolution. The Collect, 


170 HOLY EUCHARIST 





Epistle, Gospel and Creed draw out especially the 
thought of the people, whereas the preceding sections 
have largely worked upon their devotion. 


At the Offertoriwm another phase of the Liturgy is 
introduced. The bread and wine are now brought for- 
ward and offered in the service of God as first-fruits 
of the earth and tokens of our worldly offerings. In 
ancient times produce of various kinds was at this 
place offered for the support of the clergy and the 
poor, and blessed. A little later, in the prayer, ‘We 
lay before Thee, O Lord,’’ these elements are offered 
as a symbol of the sacrifice of ourselves to God’s service. 
Very shortly, in the Prayer of Consecration, they will 
be offered as a channel for Christ’s blessing, and at yet 
a later stage as His most sacred Body and Blood, to be 
used by us as an aid to unite ourselves with His will. Then 
comes the splendid appeal to the congregation to lift 
up their hearts, and, in company with the nine orders 
of Angels whose presence here is invoked, to give 
‘“eucharist’’ or thanks to Almighty God—the Sursum 
Corda and Preface, followed by the Sanctus. 


We have now entered upon the Canon, as it has been 
called since ancient times, the most important section. 
At the beginning of the Prayer of Consecration the 
celebrant proceeds to enumerate the special purposes or 
intentions for which the Sacrifice is to be offered. The 
Liturgy then explains how this great act of worship is 
in itself a mystery-drama, re-enacting in time and space 
the primal cosmic Sacrifice of the Logos, the incarna- 
tion or descent into matter of the Second Person of the 
Blessed Trinity. Now come the Words of Consecration, 
the solemn act by which the bread and wine in their 
natural substance become the Body and Blood of Christ. 
It may help us to understand this great mystery if we 
realize that our own bodies are vehicles or expressions 
of our consciousness, of the indwelling Spirit; so that 
bread and wine which nourish our bodies become here 
the special expression or manifestation of the Christ, 
the channel of His blessing for the nourishing of our 
souls. 


HULY HUA 4 Aart 

All who are present must inevitably be uplifted by 
the radiation of His holy power, and those who receive 
Holy Communion are brought by this blessed privilege 
into close and intimate union with our Lord and Master. 
Rightly do we regard this service as the supreme act 
of Christian worship, and offer thanks to Him Who gave 
it. All the love and devotion which have so freely been 
poured out during the Service, and the infinite abund- 
ance of spiritual force which has been called down from 
on high in response, are gathered together by the direct- 
ing Angel and shed abroad upon the world along with 
the benediction given by the Celebrant. Through the 
ceremony of the Holy Bucharist, each time it is cele- 
brated, there passes forth into the world a wave of peace 
and strength, the effect of which can hardly be over- 
rated; and this, which is indeed the primary object of 


the Service, is achieved at every celebration, whether 


the Priest be alone in his private oratory or minister- 
ing to a vast congregation in some magnificent cathe- 
dral. Therefore it offers to us an unequalled oppor- 
tunity of becoming labourers together with God, of do- 
ing Him true and laudable service by acting as chan- 
nels of His wondrous power. 


THE LITURGY OF THE HOLY 
EUCHARIST 


ASPERGES 


The shorter form of the Asperges, as given on page 
192, may be substituted for the following when it is 
thought desirable. 


The Priest, with his assistants, kneels before the 
Altar; he intones the words, ‘‘Thou shalt sprinkle me’? 
and *‘T will lift up mine eyes unto the hills,’? and the 
remainder of the Antiphon and Psalm is taken up by 
the choir and congregation, who stand. 

Meanwhile the Priest sprinkles with holy water the 
Altar and himself, then the clergy and the people, who 
bow and cross themselves. 


PSALM 121 
Antiphon* 


Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, O Lord, and 
I shall be clean: Thou shalt wash me, and I shall 
be whiter than snow. 


1. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from 
whence cometh my help. 


2. My help cometh even from the Lord: Who hath 
made heaven and earth. 


8. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and 
He that keepeth thee will not sleep. 





*The antiphon consists of one or more verses sung 
before and after a psalm, with a view of summarizing 
and bringing into prominence the central idea of the 
psalm. The word means “singing against, or in re- 


sponse,’’ and refers to the manner of singing these ~ 


passages, which was by way of interpolation  be- 
tween the verses of the psalm in ancient days when 
the people could not read, 


HOLY BHUUHANISLT Ce aie 


Pos eS 
4, Behold, He that keepeth Israel: shall neither 
slumber nor sleep. : 


5. The Lord Himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy 
defence upon thy right hand. 


6. So that the sun shall not smite thee by day: 
neither the moon by night. 


7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea, 
it is even He that shall keep thy soul. 


8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy 
coming in: from this time forth for evermore. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 
Antiphon : 


Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, O Lord, and 
I shall be clean: ‘Thou shalt wash me, and I shall 
be whiter than snow. 


Priest. O Lord, open Thou our lips. 


Congregation. And our mouth shall show forth thy 
praise. 


P. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? 


Cc. Even he that hath clean hands and a pure 
heart. 


P. The Lord be with you. 
c. And with thy spirit. 
Pp. Let us pray. 

The people kneel. 


THE COLLECT 


P. Guide us, O Almighty Father, in all our doings, 
and from Thy heavenly throne send down Thy holy 
Angel to be with Thy people who have met together 
to serve and to worship Thee. Through Christ our 
Lord. . R. Amen. 


THE "HOLY EVCHARIS# 


THE PREPARATION 

The people stand. The Priest intones the Invoca- 
tion, unless the shorter form of Asperges, with its pre- 
ceding Invocation, has been used. 


THE INVOCATION 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, 44 and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. BR. Amen. 

The following Antiphon and Canticle are sung by all 
together, save that the Priest alone chants the opening 
words of the Canticle, ‘‘I was glad when they said 
unto me.’? 

CANTICLE 
Antiphon 

I will go unto the Altar of God. 

Even unto the God of my joy and gladness. 

1. I was glad when they said unto me: we will go 
into the house of the Lord. 

2. I will be glad and rejoice in Thee: yea, my 
songs will I make of Thy Name, O Thou most Highest. 

3. O send out Thy light and Thy truth, that they 
may lead me: and bring me to Thy holy hill, and to 
Thy dwelling. 

4, And that I may go unto the Altar of God, even 
unto the God of my joy and gladness: and upon the 
harp will I give thanks unto Thee, O God my God. 

5. The Lord is in His holy temple: the Lord’s seat 
is in heaven. 

6. The heavens declare the glory of God; and the 
firmament showeth His handiwork. 

7. O magnify the Lord our God, and worship Him 
upon His holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy. 

8. The Lord shall give strength unto His people: 
the Lord shall give His people the blessing of peace. 


HOLY EUCHARIST Pintetn Ei) i a 


ee 
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 
Antiphon 
I will go unto the Altar of God. 
Even unto the God of my joy and gladness. 


The following versicles and responses are sung alter- 
nately by the Priest and congregation: 


P. > Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 
Who hath made heaven and earth. 

. Turn us again, O Lord, and quicken us. 
That Thy people may rejoice in Thee. 

. Trust ye in the Lord for ever. 

For our Rock of Ages is the Lord. 


CONFITEOR 

All Ieneel, and say together: 

O Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
made him to be an image of Thine own eternity; 
yet often we forget the glory of our heritage, and 
wander from the path which leads to righteousness. 
But Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and our 
hearts are ever restless till they find their rest in 
Thee. Look with the eyes of Thy love upon our mani- 
fold imperfections, and pardon all our shortcomings, 
that we may be filled with the brightness of the ever- 
lasting light, and become the unspotted mirror of Thy 
power and the image of Thy goodness. Through 
Christ our Lord. Amen. ; 

THE ABSOLUTION 

P. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, 
pless, + preserve and sanctify you; the Lord in His 
lovingkindness look down upon you and be gracious 
unto you; the Lord > absolve you from all your 
sins, and grant you the grace and comfort of the 
Holy Spirit. R. Amen. 

The people are seated. 


aveaho 


eR OM HVUEY BUCHARIST 


THE CENSING 

The censer is brought to the Priest who puts incense 
into it and blesses it saying: ; 

Mayest thou be blessed by Him in Whose honour 
thou shalt be burned. 

The Priest censes the Altar, after which the people 
stand. 

P. The Lord be with you.* 

C. And with thy spirit. 





INTROIT 

The Introit is sung by all together. 

4 Blessed be the Holy Trinity, the undivided 
Unity, eternal, immortal, invisible, to Whom be hon- 
our and glory for ever and ever. Amen, O Lord 
our God, how excellent is Thy Name in all the 
world. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and 
to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. Blessed 
be the Holy Trinity, the undivided Unity, eternal, im- 
mortal, invisible, to Whom be honour and glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

KYRIE}+ 


The Kyrie is sung by all together, the people kneel- 
ing. (At Low Celebration it is said alternately by Priest 
and people as hereunder indicated.) 

P. Kyrie eleison. 

C. Kyrie eleison. 

P. Kyrie eleison. 

*This ‘minor benediction, ’’ frequently repeated as 
the service proceeds, is designed to draw the Priest and 
people together into closer relation. 

t The usual translation of the phrases of the Kyrie, 
which are part of the ancient Greek Liturgy, is “¢Lord, 
have merey upon us,’? ‘Christ have merey upon Us, 
“‘Lord, have merey upon us.’? This conveys. a some- 
what wrong impression. The Greek word is akin to 





‘“eleemosynary,’’ and might even be rendered <é pour - 


forth Thy love upon us,’’ It indicates a dependence of 
love. 


ee 


c q HOLY EUCHARIST LAY 


. Christe eleison. 
. Christe eleison. 
- Christe eleison. 
. Kyrie eleison. 
Kyrie eleison. 

. Kyrie eleison. 


GLORIA IN EXCELSIS 


This is sung by all together, the people standing. The 
head is bowed at the words ‘‘we worship Thee,’’ ‘‘we 
gwe thanks to Thee,’’ and ‘‘receive our prayer.’’ 


Glory be to God in the highest, and on earth peace 
to men of good will. We praise Thee, we bless Thee, 
we worship Thee, we glorify Thee; we give thanks 
to Thee for Thy great glory, O Lord God, Heavenly 
King, God the Father Almighty. 

O Lord Christ, alone-born* of the Father; O Lord 
God, Indwelling Light, Son of the Father, Whose wis- 
dom mightily and sweetly ordereth all things, pour 
forth Thy love; Thou Whose strength upholdeth and 
sustaineth all creation, receive our prayer; Thou 
Whose beauty shineth through the whole universe, un- 
veil Thy glory. 

For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord; 
Thou only, O Christ, with the Holy Ghost, art 
most high in the glory of God the Father. Amen. 

P. The Lord be with you. 

C. And with thy spirit. 

P. Let us pray. 


The people kneel. 
THE COLLECTS 

P. Almighty God, unto Whom all hearts be open, 
all desires known, and from Whom no secrets are hid; 
cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration 
of Thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love Thee, 
and worthily magnify Thy holy Name. Through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


HAHAHA] 





*See footnote to Creed, page 180, 


178 HOLY EUCHARIST 


Here follow the Collect of the Day and other Collects 
if any, and finally this Collect for Peace. 


P. Teach us, O Lord, to see Thy life in all men and 
in all the peoples of Thine earth, and guide our 
nation through its leaders to preserve Thy peace, 
that the menace of war be far from our days, through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


THE EPISTLE 


The people are seated. At High Celebration the 
Epistle is read by the subdeacon (or a separate Epis- 
toller may be appointed). 

The Epistle ended, all stand and sing: 

Thanks be to God. 


THE GRADUAL 


All sing the Gradual (except that as usual the Priest 
alone chants the first half of the first verse). 


He that loveth wisdom loveth life: and they that 
seek her early shall be filled with joy. 

Teach me, O Lord, the way of Thy statutes: and 
I shall keep it unto the end. 

Give me understanding, and I shall keep Thy law: 
yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart. 

The path of the just is as the shining light: shin- 
ing more and more unto the perfect day. 


MUNDA COR MEUM. 


At High Celebration the Gospel is read by the Deacon 
(or a separate Gospeller may be appointed). He kneels 
before the centre of the Altar and intones the follow- 
img prayer: : 

Cleanse my heart and my lips, O God Who by 
the hand of Thy Seraph didst cleanse the lips of the 
prophet Isaiah with a burning coal from Thine Al- 
tar, and in Thy lovingkindness so purify me that I 
may worthily proclaim Thy holy Gospel. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


+ HOLY EUCHARIST 179 


Lhe Celebrant blesses him in the following words: 

May the Lord be in thy + heart and on thy - 
lips, that through thy heart the love of God may shine 
forth, and through thy lips His power be made mani- 
fest. R. Amen. 

If the Celebrant be without assistants, he himself in- 
tones both the prayer and the blessing, substituting 
““my’? for ‘‘thy’? in the latter. 

THE GOSPEL 

Deacon. The Lord be with you. 

C. And with thy spirit. 

As soon as the Gospel is announced all sing the fol- 
lowing, making the sign of the cross with the right 
thumb upon the forehead, lips and breast successively: 

Glory be to Thee, O Lord. 

The Gospel ended, all sing: 

Praise be to Thee, O Christ. 


THE SERMON 

If there be a sermon, it follows here. 

CREDO* 

Then is recited the Symbol of the Faith, called Nicene 
—the Church’s ancient presentation of the Christian 
revelation.+ It is intoned by all, standing and facing 
to the east. All bow the head at the words ‘‘Jesus’’ 
and ‘‘is worshipped.?’ 





*Any of the forms given under the heading ‘‘Creeds 
and Acts of Faith,’’ p. 166, may be substituted for 
this if preferred. 

+ The Liberal Catholic Church leaves to its members 
perfect freedom in the interpretation of Scriptures, 
Creeds and Liturgy. 

““The ancient Church altered the language of the 
Creeds from time to time, in order to meet the ad- 
vanee of religious thought. The modern Church has 
retained the words but altered their interpretation.’’ 
—Canon M. G. Glazebrook in The Faith of a Modern 
Churchman. 


180 ‘i HOLY EUCHARIST ° 


———————————— 


We* believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker 


of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and 
invisible. 

And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the alone-bornt Son 
of God; begotten of His Father before all agest, God 
of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God, be- 
gotten, not made, being of one Substance with the 
Father, by Whom all things were made. Who for us 
men and for our salvation came down from heaven 
(here all genuflect in reverence for the mystery of 
the Incarnation) and was incarnate, of** the Holy 
Ghost and the Virgin Mary, and was made man. 
(All rise again.) And was crucified also for us; under 
Pontius Pilate He suffered, and was buried. And the 
third day He rose again according to the Scriptures, 
and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right 
hand of the Father. And He shall come again with 
glory to judge both the quick and the dead: Whose 
Kingdom shall have no end. 

And we believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, the 
Giver of Life. Who proceedeth from the Father and 
the Son, Who with the Father and the Son together 
is worshipped and glorified, Who spake by the Pro- 
phets. And we believe one holy catholic and apos- 
tolic Church. We acknowledge one baptism for the 





*The original form, The distinction between ‘‘we’’ 
and ‘‘I’’ marks the difference between Conciliar and 
Baptismal Creeds, that is to say, between the con- 
fession of the common faith and the confession of the 
individual faith. 

+ Greek ‘monogenes,’ that is, born from -a single 
principle, not from a syzygy or pair. It is difficult to 
find a short and suitable equivalent for this in’ Eng- 
lish. ‘Only-begotten’ is altogether misleading. 

t Greek ‘aionon,’ zons or ages. A technical word 
of the Gnostic nomenclature, signifying ‘emanations.’ 

** Literally so translated from the Greek. There 


is no warrant for the usual rendering ‘‘by the Hol 
Ghost of the Virgin Mary.’ oes 1) 


sla, Seas ning, 


HOLY EUCHARIST 181 


remission of sins. And we look for the resurrection 
of the dead > and the life of the world to come. 
Amen. 
P. The Lord be with you. 
C. And with thy spirit. 
OFFERTORIUM 


A hymn is usually sung here, white the offertory is 
taken. At the end of the hymn the people are seated, 
and the following sentences are intoned by the Priest: 


From the rising up of the sun even unto the go- 
ing down of the same the Lord’s Name shall be mag- 
nified; and in every place incense shall be offered 
unto His Name, and a pure offering. There shall be 
heard in this place the voice of joy and the voice 
of gladness, the voice of them that shall bring the 
sacrifice of praise into the house of the Lord. 

The Priest offers the host, saying: ; 

We adore Thee, O God, Who art the source of all 
life and goodness, and with true and thankful hearts 
we offer unto Thee this token of Thine own life- 
giving gifts bestowed upon us, Thou Who art the 
giver of all. / 

He pours wine and a little water into the chalice, 
saying: 

According to immemorial custom, O Lord, we now 
mix water with this wine, praying Thee that we may 
evermore abide in Christ. and He in us. 

He offers the chalice, saying: 

We offer unto Thee, O Lord, this chalice with joy 
and gladness; may the worship which we offer ascend 
before Thy Divine Majesty as a sacrifice, pure and 
acceptable in Thy sight. Through Christ our Lord. 
R. Amen. 

THE SECOND CENSING 

The Priest censes the oblations and the Altar in the 
prescribed manner, and says: 

As this: incense rises before Thee, O Lord, so 
Jet. our prayer be set forth in Thy sight. Let Thy 


182 HOLY EUCHARIST 


MOET Se 
holy Angels encompass Thy people and breathe forth 
upon them the spirit of Thy blessing. 

As he returns the censer to the thurifer or deacon, he 
Says: 

May the Lord enkindle within us the fire of His 
love and the flame of everlasting charity. 

The Priests, clerics, choir and people are censed- 
The people stand as the thurifer approaches them, bow 
before and after being censed, and are seated. During 
the censing of the choir and people the Priest recites 
the Lavabo in a low tone, raising his voice for the 
Gloria. 

LAVABO 

I will wash my hands in innocency, O Lord: and so 
will I go to Thine Altar. 3 

That I may show the voice of thanksgiving: and 
tell of all Thy wondrous works. 

Lord, I have loved the habitation of Thy house: 
and the ‘place where Thine honour dwelleth. 

My foot standeth right: I will praise the Lord in the 
congregations. 

Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. BR. Amen. 

The people stand. 


ORATE FRATRES 

P. Brethren, pray that my sacrifice and yours 
may be acceptable to God the Father Almighty. 

C. May the Lord receive the sacrifice at thy 
hands, and sanctify our lives in His service. 

The people kneel. 

P. We lay before Thee, O Lord, these Thy crea- 
tures of bread and wine, in + token of our sacrifice 
of praise and thanksgiving; for here we offer and 
present unto Thee ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be 
a holy and continual sacrifice unto Thee, that we, 
who are very members incorporate in the mystical 
body of Thy Son, which is the blessed company of all 


HOLY EUCHARIST 183 


faithful people, may hear that His most joyful voice: 
““Come unto Me, O ye that be blessed of My Father, 
and possess the kingdom which is prepared for you 
from the beginning. of the world,’’ through the same 
Jesus Christ, our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with 
Thee in the unity of the Holy Spirit, ever one God 
throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


THE CANON 


The people rise, and the following passages are sung 
alternately : 

P. The Lord be with you. 

C. And with thy spirit. 


SURSUM CORDA 


Lift up your hearts. 

We lift them up unto the Lord. 

Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. 
It is meet and right so to do. 


PREFACE 


P. It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, 
that we should at all times and in all places give 
thanks unto Thee, O Lord, holy Father, Almighty 
everlasting God. (Here follows the proper Preface, 
if any). Therefore with Angels and Archangels, with 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 
with Cherubim, and Seraphim, and with all the com- 
pany of heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious 
Name, evermore praising Thee and saying: 


SANCTUS AND BENEDICTUS QUI VENIT 
The people kneel and sing the following. The 
bell is rung each time the word ‘‘ Holy’’ is uttered. 


Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and 
earth are full of Thy glory; glory be to Thee, O Lord 
most high. © 


Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the 
Lord. > Hosanna in the highest. 


25h 2m 


184 3 HOLY HUCHARIST 


THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION* 


P, Wherefore, O most loving Father, we Thy ser-— 
vants do pray Thee, through Jesus Christ, Thy Son, 
our -Lord, to + receive, to + purify, and to 
+ hallow this oblation which we make unto Thee. 
We desire to offer this holy Sacrifice first for Thy 
holy catholic Church; that it may please Thee to grant 
her peace, to watch over her, to bring her to unity, 
and to guide her throughout the world; likewise for 
Thy servants George our King,t N. our Presiding 
Bishop, N. our Bishop, for all our Bishops, clergy and 
faithful, and for all here present, whose faith and 
devotion are known unto Thee. We do also call to 
mind all who in this transitory life are in trouble, 
sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity (es- 
pecially ...). Likewise do we offer it for all those 
Thy children whom it hath pleased Thee to deliver 
from the burden of the flesh (especially for .. .), that, 
freed from earthly toil and care, they may enjoy 
the felicity of Thy Presence, evermore praising Thee 
im word and deed, O God everlasting, living, and 
true. 

{[Uniting in this joyful Sacrifice with Thy holy 
Church throughout all the ages, we lift our hearts 
in adoration to Thee, O God the Son, consubstantial, 
co-eternal with the Father, Who, abiding unchange- 
able within Thyself, didst nevertheless in the mystery 
of Thy boundless love and Thine eternal Sacrifice 
preathe forth Thine own divine life into Thy universe, 
and thus didst offer Thyself as the Lamb slain from 
the foundation of the world, dying in» very truth 
that we might live. : 





*Throughout the Prayer of Consecration where 
erosses are to be made by the Priest, they are made 
over the sacred elements collectively, save where, on 
the one hand, Body or Bread is mentioned, and, on the 
other, Blood or Chalice. 

tThis, of course, will be varied outside the British 
Empire. 

{The portion in brackets may be omitted. 


HOLY EUCHARIST 185 


Omnipotent, all-pervading, by that self-same Sac- 
rifice Thou dost continually uphold all creation, rest- 
ing not by night nor day, working evermore through 
that most august Hierarchy of Thy glorious Saints, 
Who live but to do Thy will as perfect channels of 
Thy wondrous power, to Whom we ever offer heart- 
felt love and reverence. 


Thou, O most dear and holy Lord, hast in Thine 
ineffable wisdom deigned to ordain for us this Blessed 
Sacrament of Thy love, that in it we may not only 
commemorate in symbol that Thine eternal Oblation, 
but verily take part in it, and perpetuate thereby, 
within the limitations of time and space which veil 
our earthly eyes from the excess of Thy glory, the 
enduring Sacrifice by which the world is nourished 
and sustained. ] 


With his hands spread over the offerings, he continues: 


Wherefore, O holy Lord, Father Almighty, we pray 
Thee to look down on and accept these offerings, 
which we Thy servants and Thy whole household 
do make unto Thee, in obedience to the command of 
Thy most blessed Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; 


Which offerings do Thou, O Father, deign with 
Thy Holy Spirit and Word to + bless, + approve, 
and + ratify, that they may become for us His most 
precious + Body and + Blood. 


Who the day before He suffered took bread into His 
holy and venerable hands, and with His eyes lifted 
up to heaven unto Thee, God, His Almighty Father, 
giving thanks to Thee, He + blessed, brake, and 
gave it to His disciples, saying: Take and eat ye 
all of this, for 


THIS IS MY BODY. 


In like manner, after He had supped; taking also 
this noble chalice into His holy and venerable hands, 
again giving thanks to Thee, He + -blessed it and 
gave it to His disciples, saying: Take and drink ye 
all of this, for 





186 HOLY EUCHARIST 


THIS IS MY BLOOD. 


As oft as ye shall do these things, ye shall do them 
in remembrance of Me, 

After some moments of silent adoration, the follow- 
ing verse shall be sung very softly, all devoutly kneel- 
ing: 

Thee we adore, O hidden Splendour, Thee, 
Who in Thy Sacrament dost deign to be; 
We worship Thee beneath this earthly veil, 
And here Thy Presence we devoutly hail. 


After a short pause all stand and sing the Adeste 
Fideles, as under: : 


O come, all ye faithful, joyful and triumphant, 

O come ye, O come ye to Bethlehem. 

Come and behold Him, Monarch of the Angels; 

O come, let us adore Him; O come, let us adore Him; 
O come, let us adore Him, Christ the Lord. 


God of God, Light of Light, 

Yet under earthly forms His Light He veils, 
Very God, alone-born of the Father; 

O come, let us adore Him, ete. 


Sing, choirs of Angels, sing in exultation; 
Sing, all ye citizens of heaven above; 
Glory to God in the highest; 

O come, let us adore Him, ete. 


Yea, Lord, we greet Thee, throned on Thine Altar; 
Ever to Thee be highest glory given, 

Word of the Father, Splendour everlasting; 

O come, let us adore Him, ete. Amen. 

The people again kneel. 

P. Wherefore, O Lord and heavenly Father, we 
Thy humble servants, bearing in mind the ineffable 
sacrifice of Thy Son, the mystery of His wondrous 
incarnation, His mighty resurrection, and His trium- 
phant ascension, do here make before Thy Divine 
Majesty the memorial which our Lord hath willed us 
to make, and we do offer unto Thee this, the most 
_ precious gift which Thou hast bestowed upon us: 


HOLY EUCHARIST 187 





this pure + Host, this holy + Host, this glorious 
+ Host, the holy -++ Bread of life everlasting, and 
the -+ Chalice of eternal salvation. 


This do we present before Thee in token of our 
love and of the perfect devotion and sacrifice of our 
minds and hearts to Thee; and we pray that Thou 
wouldst command Thy holy Angel to bear our obla- 
tion to Thine Altar on high, there to be offered by 
Him Who, as the eternal High Priest, for ever offers 
Himself as the eternal Sacrifice. 


And as He hath ordained that the heavenly Sac- 
rifice shall be mirrored here on earth through the 
ministry of mortal men, to the end that Thy holy 
people may be knit more closely into fellowship with 
Thee, we do pray for Thy servant who ministers at 
this Altar, that, meetly celebrating the mysteries of 
the most holy + Body and + Blood of Thy Son, he 
may be + filled with Thy mighty power and bless- 


He makes this last cross upon himself. 


ing. Likewise we pray Thee to sanctify Thy people here 
present with these Thy heavenly gifts, and through 
these mysteries do Thou + hallow, + quicken, and 
+ bless them, that both in their hearts and in their 
lives they may show forth Thy praise and glorify 
Thy holy Name. 


He makes with the Host the sign of the cross three 
_ times over the Chalice. J 


All these things do we ask, O Father, in the Name 
and through the mediation of Thy most blessed Son, 
for we acknowledge and confess with our hearts and 
lips that + by Him were all things made, yea, all 
things both in heaven and earth; + with Him as the 
indwelling Life do all things exist, and + in Him as 
the transcendent Glory all things live and move and 
have their being: 


Then horizontally twice between the Chalice and his 
breast. 


To Whom with thee, O mighty + Father, in the 


188 HOLY BUCHARIST 


unity of the Holy + Spirit, be ascribed all honour 


and glory, throughout the ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Priest here holds the Host directly over the 
Chalice, and raises both to the level of his eyes. 


THE COMMUNION 
*[P. Let us pray. 


Instructed by the words of sacred Scripture, and 
following the tradition of holy Church from of old, 
we now say: 


All now sing or intone: 


Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy 
Name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done on 
earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily 
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive 
them that trespass against us. And lead us not 
into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For Thine 
is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever 
and ever. Amen.] 


THE COMMEMORATION OF THE SAINTS 


P. Here do we give unto Thee, O Lord, most 
high praise and hearty thanks for the wonderful 
grace and virtue declared in holy Mary, the ever- 
virgin Mother, and in all Thy glorious Saints from 
the beginning of the world, who have been the choice 
vessels of Thy grace and a shining light unto many 
generations. 


Here the Priest crosses himself with the paten. 


And we +. join with them in worship before Thy 
great white throne, whence fiow all love and light 
and blessing through all the worlds which Thou hast 
made. ; 


O Son of God, Who showest Thyself this day 
upon a thousand Altars and yet art one and indivisible, 
in token of Thy great Sacrifice we break This Thy 
Body, 





*The portion in brackets may be omitted.. 


etl lace be 


——o 


HOLY EUCHARIST 189 


Here he breaks the Host in half over the Chalice, 
and with a small Particle thereof makes the sign of 
the cross thrice over the Chalice, and finally at the 
word ‘‘one’’ drops the Particle into the Chalice. 


praying that by this action, ordained from of old, Thy 
+ strength, Thy + peace and Thy + blessing, which 
Thou dost give us in this. holy Sacrament, may be 
spread abroad upon Thy world; and as Thou, O Lord 
Christ, wast made known to Thy disciples in the 
breaking of bread, so may Thy many children know 
themselves to be one in Thee, even as Thou art one 
with the Father. R. Amen, 


THE SALUTATION OF PEACE 


O Lord Jesu Christ, Who didst say to Thine apos- 
tles: ‘‘Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto 
you,’’ regard not our weakness, but the faith of 
Thy Church, and grant her that peace and unity 
which are agreeable to Thy holy will and command- 
ment. R. Amen. 


The Salutation of Peace, which follows, is first given 
by the Priest to one of the clergy. It is then passed 
from one to another in the sanctuary. The last recipi- 
ent turns towards the people, and, with outstretched 
arms, sings the words to them. (At Low Celebration 
the Priest himself faces the people, and, with uplifted 
arms, utters the words of salutation.) 


P. The peace of the Lord be always with you. 
C. And with thy spirit. 


P.. O Thou Who in this adorable Sacrament hast 
left us a living memorial and pledge of Thy marvel- 
lous love for mankind, and dost therein graciously 
draw us into wondrous and mystic communion with 
Thee, grant us so to receive the sacred mysteries of 
Thy Body and Blood that our souls may be lifted 
into the immensity of Thy love, and that, being filled 
with a high endeavour, we may ever be mindful of 
Thine indwelling Presence and breathe forth the frag- 
rance of a holy life. R. Amen. 


190 HOLY EUCHARIST 


me 


The Priest, clergy and servers recewe Holy Com-— 
munition. 


The people meanwhile may say privately the follow- 
ing prayer: 


Unto Thee, O Perfect One, the Lord and Lover 
of men, do we commend our life and hope. For Thou 
art the Heavenly Bread, the Life of the whole world; 
Thou art in all places and endurest all things, the 
Treasury of endless good and the Well of infinite com- 
passion. 


After the Priest and those in the sanctuary have re- 
ceived Holy Communion, the Priest, with a Particle, 
blesses the people, as he says: 


+ Ye that desire to partake of the Body of the 
Lord, draw nigh and receive this most holy Sacra- 
ment. 


The people should come forward to the Communion 
rail and kneel.* 


As he administers the Holy Communion to each, the 
Priest says: 


The Body of our Lord Christ keep thee unto life 
eternal. 


The Communion being ended, the Priest says: 


Under the veil of earthly things now have we 
communion with our Lord Jesus Christ; soon with 
open face shall we behold Him, and, rejoicing in His 
glory, be made like unto Him. Then shall His true 
disciples be brought by Him with exceeding joy 
before the presence of His Father’s glory. 





*It is the custom in our churches to administer 
the Sacred Host directly into the mouth, and not into 
the hand of the communicant, for which purpose the 
head should be held upright, the mouth opened, and 
the tongue slightly extended beyond the lips during 
the administration. 





HOLY EUCHARIST Ug 


COMMUNIO 
All stand and sing: 


Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be 
unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. 

P. The Lord be with you. 

Cc. And with thy spirit. 


POSTCOMMUNIO 
P. Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 


P. We who have been refreshed with Thy heavenly 
gifts do pray Thee, O Lord, that Thy-grace may be 
so grafted inwardly in our hearts, that it may con- 
tinually be made manifest in our lives. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Lord be with you. 
And with thy spirit. 
Ite, missa est. 

Deo gratias. 


THE BENEDICTION 


P. The peace of God, which passeth all understand- 
ing, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge 
and love of God, and of His Son, Christ our Lord; and 
the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, 4 the Son 
and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain 
with you always. R. Amen. 


P. May the Holy Ones, Whose pupils you aspire 
to become, show you the Light you seek, give you the 
strong aid of Their compassion and Their wisdom. 
There is a peace that passeth understanding; it abides 
in the hearts of those who live in the Eternal; there 
is a power that maketh all things new; it lives and 
moves in those who know the Self as One. May that 
peace brood over you, that power uplift you, till you 
stand where the One Initiator is invoked, till you 
see His }4 Star shine forth, R. Amen. 


ana 


A SHORTER FORM FOR THE 
CELEBRATION OF THE 
HOLY EUCHARIST 


Note.—This shorter form may be used by Priests at 
their regular daily Celebration, at services for children, 
and whenever the fuller version is found too long for 
practical convenience. At his discretion the Priest may 
introduce passages from the longer Celebration, such 
as the Offertory sentence, the Minor Benedictions, and so 
forth. 





The people stand. The Priest intones: 
THE INVOCATION 


In the name of the Father, }4 and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost. BR. Amen. 


ASPERGES 


Receiving the aspergill, he makes the sign of the 
cross over himself with it, saying: 

May the Lord purify me that I may worthily per- 
form His service. 

Sprinkling the Altar in the middle, then. the chancel 
to his left and to his right, he continues: 

In the strength of the Lord do I repel all evil from 
this His holy Altar and sanctuary, : 

Turning to the people and sprinkling them with the 
same triple motion: 
and from this House, wherein we worship Him: 

Turning back to the Altar and resigning the asper- 
gill: : 
and I pray our heavenly Father that He will send His 
holy Angel to. build for us a spiritual Temple through 
which His strength and blessing may be poured forth 
upon His people. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 

Turning to the people, the Priest says: 

Brethren, let us now lay the foundation of our 
Temple. ft 


SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 193 


THE CANTICLE 


He turns to the Altar, and all sing this Canticle, ex- 
cept that the Priest alone chants the first half of the 
first verse. 

Antiphon - 

Christ is our foundation. 

And our chief corner-stone. 

1. We are no more strangers and foreigners: but 
fellow-citizens with the saints and of the household 
of God; , 

2. And are built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets: Jesus Christ Himself being the chief 
-corner-stone. : 

_ 3. In Whom all the building fitly framed together: 
groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord; 

4. In Whom ye also are builded together: for an 
habitation of God through the Spirit. 

_ 5. Except the Lord build the house: their labour 
is but lost that build it. 

| 6. The foundation of God standeth sure, having 
this seal: let everyone that nameth the Name of 
Christ depart from iniquity. 


Antiphon 
Christ is our foundation. 
And our chief corner-stone. 


CONFITEOR 


All kneel, and say together: 


OO Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
made him to be an image of Thine own eternity; yet 
| often we forget the glory of our heritage, and wan- 
‘der from the path which leads to righteousness. But 
Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and our hearts 
-are ever restless till they find their rest in Thee. 
Look with the eyes of Thy love upon our manifold 
imperfections, and pardon all our shortcomings, that 
we may be filled with the brightness of the ever- 
G 


| 
| 





194 SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 


lasting light, and become the unspotted mirror of Thy 
power and the image of Thy goodness. Through Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


THE ABSOLUTION 


P. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy 
Ghost, bless, + preserve, and sanctify you; the Lord 
in His lovingkindness look down upon you and be 
gracious unto you; the Lord >» ‘absolve you from 
all your sins, and grant you the grace and comfort 
of the Holy Spirit. R. Amen. 


The people rise. 


P. (turning to the Altar). With praise and with 
prayer shall our Temple be built. 


C. To God alone be the glory. 


THE CENSING 


While the Introit is being sung, the Priest blesses. the 
incense, censes the Altar in due.and ancient form, and is 
himself censed; but if it be said, the censing comes 
first, the people meanwhile being seated. 


INTROIT 


x Blessed be the Holy Trinity, the undivided Un- 
ity, eternal, immortal, invisible, to Whom be honour 
and glory for ever and ever. Amen. O Lord our 
God, how excellent is Thy Name in all the world. 
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the 
Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. Bless- 
ed be the Holy Trinity, the undivided Unity, eternal, 
immortal, invisible, to Whom be honour and glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 


KYRIE 


The Kyrie is sung by all together, the people kneel- 
ing (at Low Celebration it is said alternately by Priest 
and people, as hereunder indicated). 


SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 195 


. Kyrie eleison. 
Kyrie eleison. 
. Kyrie eleison. 
Christe eleison. 
. Christe eleison. 
Christe eleison. 
. Kyrie eleison. 
. Kyrie eleison. 
. Kyrie eleison. 


GLORIA IN EXCELSIS 

This is sung by all, the people standing. 

Glory be to God in the highest, and on earth peace 
to men of good-will. We praise Thee, we bless Thee, 
‘we worship Thee, we glorify Thee; we give thanks 
to Thee for Thy great glory, O Lord God, Heavenly 
King, God the Father Almighty. 
© Lord Christ, alone-born of the Father; O Lord 
-God, Indwelling Light, Son of the Father, Whose Wis- 
dom mightily and sweetly ordereth all things, pour 
forth Thy love; Thou Whose strength upholdeth and 
‘sustaineth all creation, receive our prayer; Thou 
‘Whose beauty shineth through the whole universe, 
‘unveil Thy glory. ~ 
| For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord; 
‘Thou only, O Christ, with the Holy Ghost, -y art 
| most high in the glory of God the Father. Amen. 


P. Let us pray. 


WHaAHAHAHAN 


THE COLLECT 


| The Priest intones the Collect of the Day and the 
following Collect for peace: 

| Teach us, O Lord, to see Thy life in all men 
| and in all the peoples of Thine earth, and guide our 
nation through its leaders to preserve Thy peace, that 
| the menace of war be far from our days, through Christ 
our Lord. 

THE EPISTLE AND GOSPEL 

may be omitted; if they are read, the ritual will be as 


follows: 
G2 


196 SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 


The people are seated. At High Celebration -the 
Epistle is read by the Subdeacon (or a separate Epistol- 
ler may be appointed). 


The Epistle ended, all stand and sing: 
Thanks be to God. 

THE GRADUAL 
All sing the Gradual. 


He that loveth wisdom loveth life: and they that 
seek her early shall be filled with joy. 


Teach me, O Lord, the way of Thy statutes: and I 
shall keep it unto the end. : 


Give me understanding, and I shall keep Thy law: 
yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart. 


The path of the just is as the shining light: shin- 
ing more and more unto the perfect day. 


MUNDA COR MEUM 


At High Celebration the Gospel is read by the Deacon 
(or a separate Gospeller may be appointed). He kneels 
before the centre of the Altar and intones the following 
prayer: 

Cleanse my heart and my lips, O God, Who 
by the hand of Thy Seraph didst cleanse the lips 
of the prophet Isaiah with a burning coal from Thine 
Altar, and in Thy lovingkindness so purify me that I 
may worthily proclaim Thy holy gospel. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Celebrant blesses him in the following words: 


May the Lord be in thy heart and on thy lips, that 
through thy heart the love of God may shine forth, 


and through thy lips His power be made manifest. 
R. Amen. 


If the Celebrant be without assistants, he himself in- 
tones both the prayer and the blessing, substituting 
““my’’ for ‘“thy’’ in the latter. 


SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST TOT 


THE GOSPEL 


The Deacon or Gospeller sings: 

The Lord be with you. 

C. And with thy spirit. 

As soon as the Gospel is announced all sing the fol- 
lowing, making the sign of the cross with the right 
thumb upon the forehead, lips and breast successively: 

Glory be to Thee, O Lord. 

The Gospel ended, all sing: 

Praise be to Thee, O Christ. 


THE SERMON 
If there be a sermon, it follows here. 


THE CREED 


Any of the Creeds or Acts of Faith on p. 166 et seq. 
may be used instead of the following, if preferred. 


All. We believe that God is Love, and Power, and 
Truth, and Light; that perfect justice rules the world: 
that all His sons shall one day reach His Feet; how- 
ever far they stray. We hold the Fatherhood of God, 
the Brotherhood of man; we know that we do serve 
Him best when best we serve our brother man. So 
‘shall His blessing rest on us, h and peace for ever- 
‘more. Amen. 





OFFERTORIUM 
The people are seated. The Priest offers the host. 


P. We adore Thee, O God, Who art the source of 
all life and goodness, and with true and thankful 
hearts we offer unto Thee this token of Thine own life- 
giving gifts bestowed upon us, Thou Who art the 
giver of all. 

He pours wine and a little water into the chalice, 
saying: 

According to immemorial custom, O Lord, we 


now mix water with this wine, praying Thee that 
we may evermore abide in Christ and He in us. 


198 SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 





He offers the chalice. 


P. We offer unto Thee, O Lord, this chalice with 
joy and gladness; may the worship which we offer 
ascend before Thy Divine Majesty as a sacrifice, pure 
and acceptable in Thy sight. Through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen. 


THE SECOND CENSING 


A hymn may be sung here while the offertory is be- 
ing collected, and during that hymn the Priest censes the 
oblations and the Altar in due and ancient form. When 
the hymn is finished the Priest holds up the censer be- 
fore the centre of the Altar, saying: 


As this incense rises before Thee, O Lord, so let 
our prayer be set forth in Thy sight. Let Thy holy 
Angels encompass Thy people and breathe forth upon 
them the spirit of Thy blessing. 


As he returns the censer to the thurifer or deacon, he 
says: 


May the Lord enkindle within us the fire of His 
love and the flame of everlasting charity. 


He is himself censed, as are afterwards the chow 
and people, who stand for this ceremony, bowing before 
and after. The Priest dips his fingers into a bowl 
of water, wipes them, and says, turning towards the 
people: 

ORATE FRATRES 


Brethren, we have built a Temple for the distri- 
bution of Christ’s power; let us now prepare a chan- 
nel for its reception; and to that end pray ye that 
my sacrifice and yours may be acceptable to God the 
Father Almighty. | 

C. May the Lord receive the sacrifice at thy hands, 
and sanctify our lives in His service. 

P. Let us pray. 

We lay before Thee, O Lord, these Thy creatures 


of bread and wine, + linking them spiritually with 
ourselves, and praying Thee to receive through them 


SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 199 


our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; for here we 
offer and present unto Thee ourselves, our souls and 
bodies, to be a holy and continual sacrifice unto Thee. 
May our strength be spent in Thy service, and our 
love poured forth upon Thy people, Thou Who livest 
for ever and ever. R. Amen. 

The people rise: 

P. The Lord be with you. 

Cc. And with thy spirit. 


SURSUM CORDA 


P. Lift up your hearts. 

C. We lift them up unto the Lord. 
 -&P. Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. 
| C. It is meet and right so to do. 
| PREFACE 
| P. It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, 
‘that we should at all times and in all places give 
‘thanks unto Thee, O Lord, holy Father, Almighty 
| everlasting God. (Here follows the proper Preface, if 
| any.) Therefore, with Angels and Archangels, with 
| Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, with 
Cherubim and Seraphim, and with all the company of 
heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious Name, 
|}evermore praising Thee, and saying: 


SANCTUS AND BENEDICTUS QUI VENIT 


| The people kneel and all sing: 

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts. Heaven and 
| earth are full of ane glory; Glory be to Thee, O Lord 
| most high. 

| Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord. 
| yf Hosanna in the highest. 


| THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION 


The Priest continues: 


O Lord, these our oblations have served as tokens 
and channels of our love and devotion towards Thee; 





200 SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 


but now we + break the link with us and with all 
lower things, and we pray Thee to + purify and to +. 
hallow them as earthly channels of Thy wondrous 
power. We desire to offer this holy Sacrifice espec- 
ially for Thy holy catholic Church, for George our 
King, N. our Presiding Bishop, N. our Bishop, for 
all our Bishops, clergy, and faithful, for those here 
present, and for all who in this transitory life are in 
trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity 
(especially .. .). Likewise do we offer it for all 
those Thy children whom it hath pleased Thee to de- 
liver from the burden of the flesh (especially for .. .), 
that, freed from earthly toil and care, they may enjoy 
the felicity of Thy Presence, evermore praising Thee 
in word and deed, O God, everlasting, living, and true. 

With his hands spread over the offerings, he continues; 

Wherefore, O holy Lord, Father Almighty, we pray 
Thee to look down on and accept as a channel these 
offerings, and with Thy Holy Spirit and Word to + 
bless, + approve, and + ratify them that they may 
become for us His most precious + Body and + Blood. 

Who the day before He suffered took bread into His 
holy and venerable hands, and with His eyes lifted up 
to heaven unto Thee, God, His Almighty Father, giving 
thanks to Thee, He + blessed, brake, and gave it 
to His disciples, saying: Take and eat ye all of this, 
for 

THIS IS MY BODY. 

In like manner, after He had supped, taking also 
this noble chalice into His holy and venerable hands, 
again giving thanks to Thee, He + blessed it and 
gave it to His disciples, saying: Take and drink ye 
all of this, for 


THIS IS MY BLOOD. 


As oft as ye shall do these things, ye shall do 
them in remembrance of Me. 


After some moments of silent adoration, the follow- 


ing verse shall be sung very softly, all devoutly kneel- 
ing: 











SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 201 


_ Thee we adore, O hidden Splendour, Thee, 
Who in Thy Sacrament dost deign to be; 
We worship Thee beneath this earthly veil, 
And here Thy presence we devoutly hail. 


After a short pause all stand and sing the Adeste 
Fideles, as under: 


O come, all ye faithful, joyful and triumphant, 

O come ye, O come ye to Bethlehem. 

Come and behold Him, Monarch of the Angels; 

O come, let us adore Him; O come, let us adore Him; 
O come, let us adore Him, Christ the Lord. 


| Yea, Lord, we greet Thee, throned on Thine Altar, 


Ever to Thee be highest glory given. 
Word of the Father, Splendour everlasting ; 
O come, let us adore Him, ete. Amen. 


The people again kneel. 


P. Wherefore, O Lord and heavenly Father, we Thy 
humble servants do offer unto Thee,this, the most 
precious gift which Thou hast bestowed upon us, in 


| token of our + love, and of the perfect + devotion 


and + sacrifice of our + minds and + hearts to Thee; 
and we pray that Thou wouldst command Thy holy 
Angel to bear our oblation to Thine Altar on high, 
there to be offered by Him Who, as the eternal High 
Priest, for ever offers Himself as the eternal Sacri- 
fice. 


And we do pray for Thy servant who ministers at 


| this Altar, that, meetly celebrating the mysteries of 
| the most holy + Body and + Blood of Thy Son, 





he may be + filled with Thy mighty power and bless- 


ing. 
He makes this last cross upon himself. 


Likewise we pray Thee to sanctify Thy people here 
present with these Thy heavenly gifts, and through 
these mysteries do Thou + hallow, + quicken, and + 
bless them, that both in their hearts and in their 
lives they may show forth Thy praise and glorify Thy 


holy Name. 


202 SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 5; 


He makes with the Host the sign of the cross three 


times over the Chalice. 


All these things do we ask, O Father, in the Name 
and through the mediation of Thy most blessed Son, 
for we acknowledge and confess with our hearts and 
lips that + by Him were all things made, yea, all 
things both in heaven and earth; + with Him as the 
indwelling Life do all things exist, and + in Him as 
the transcendent Glory all things live and move and 
have their being: 


Then horizontally twice between the Chalice and his 
breast. 


To Whom with Thee, O mighty + Father, in the 
unity of the Holy + Spirit, be ascribed all honour 
and glory, throughout the ages of ages. BR. Amen, 


The Priest here holds the Host directly over the 
Chalice, and raises both to the level of his eyes. 


THE COMMEMORATION OF THE SAINTS 
The Priest crosses himself with the paten. 


We praise and thank Thee, holy Lord, for the glory 
of Thy Saints, and we + join with them in worship 
before Thy great white throne, whence flow all love 


and light and blessing through all the worlds which 


Thou hast made. 


O Son of God, Who showest Thyself this day upon | 


a thousand altars and yet art one and indivisible, in 
token of Thy great Sacrifice we break this Thy Body, 


> 


Here he breaks the Host in half over the Chalice, and 
with a small Particle thereof makes the sign of the 


““one’’ drops the Particle into the Chalice. 


praying that by this action, ordained from of old, Thy 
+ strength, Thy + peace and Thy + blessing, which 
Thou dost give us in this holy Sacrament, may be 
spread abroad upon Thy world; and as Thou, O Lord 
Christ, wast made known to Thy disciples in the 


cross thrice over the Chalice, and finally at the word 


| 


ly SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 203 
i breaking of bread, so may Thy many children know 
themselves to be one in Thee, even as Thou art one 
with the Father. R. Amen. 


THE SALUTATION OF PEACE 


The Priest faces the people and, with outstretched 
arms, says: ; 

The peace of the Lord be always with you. 

Cc. And with thy spirit. 


P. O Thou Who in this adorable Sacrament hast 
left us a living memorial and pledge of Thy marvel- 
| lous love for mankind, and dost therein graciously 
draw us into wondrous and mystic communion with 
| Thee, grant us so to receive the sacred mysteries of 
Thy Body and Blood that our souls may be lifted into 
the immensity of Thy love, and that, being filled 
with a high endeavour, we may ever be mindful of 
Thine indwelling Presence and breathe forth the frag- 
rance of a holy life. R. Amen. 


. 
| 
| 
| The Priest communicates in both kinds, and admin- 
| 





isters to the clergy and choir as usual. He blesses the 
people with a Particle as he says: 

+ Ye that desire to partake of the Body of the 
Lord, draw nigh and receive this most holy Sacra- 
ment. 

As he administers the communion to each, the Priest 
says: 

The Body of our Lord Christ keep thee unto 
life eternal. 

When all who wish have communicated, he performs 
the ablutions in the usual form, and says: 


Under the veil of earthly things now have we com- 
munion with our Lord Jesus Christ; soon with open 
face shall we behold Him, and, rejoicing in His glory, 
be made like unto Him. Then shall His true disciples 
be brought by Him with exceeding joy pefore the pres- 
ence of His Father’s-glory. 


«2804 «Ss SHORTER FORM HOLY EUCHARIST 


COMMUNIO 
All stand, and sing: 
Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks- 
giving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto 
our God for ever and ever. Amen. 


POSTCOMMUNIO 


P. Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 


P. We who have been refreshed with Thy heavenly 
gifts do pray Thee, O Lord, that Thy grace may be 
so grafted inwardly in our hearts, that it may con- 
tinually be made manifest in our lives. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen, 


P. The Lord be with you. 
C. And with thy spirit. 
P. Ite, missa est. 

C. Deo gratias. 


THE BENEDICTION 


P. The peace of God, which passeth all understand- 
ing, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge 
and love of God, and of His Son, Christ our Lord; 
and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, 
the Son and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and 
remain with you always. R. Amen. 


P. May the Holy Ones, Whose pupils you aspire 
to become, show you the Light you seek, give you the 
Strong aid of Their compassion and Their wisdom. 
There is a peace that passeth understanding; it abides 
in the hearts of those who live in the Eternal; there 
is a power that maketh all things new; it lives and 
moves in those who know the Self as One. May 
that peace brood over you, that power uplift you, till 
you stand where the One Initiator is invoked, till you 
see His }4 Star shine forth, R. Amen, 


1 \ 








“FORM FOR THE ADMINISTRATION 
~ OF HOLY COMMUNION WITH 
THE RESERVED SACRAMENT 





THE INVOCATION 
Standing before the Altar steps, the Priest says+ 


In the Name of the Father, > and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


All kneel, and say the Confiteor. 
CONFITEOR 


O Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
made him to be an image of Thine own eternity; yet 
often we forget the glory of our heritage, and wander ° 
from the path which leads to righteousness. But 
Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and our 
hearts are ever restless till they find their rest in Thee. 
Look with the eyes of Thy love upon our manifold im- 
perfections, and pardon all our shortcomings, that we 
may be filled with the brightness of the everlasting 
light, and become the unspotted mirror of Thy power 
and the image of Thy goodness. Through Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 

THE ABSOLUTION 


P. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy 
Ghost, bless, + preserve and sanctify you; the Lord 
in His lovingkindness look down upon you and be 
gracious unto you; the Lord > absolve you 
from all your sins, and grant you the grace and com- 
fort of the Holy Spirit. R. Amen. 


P. The Lord be with you. 
c. And with thy spirit. 
P. Let us pray. 


O God, Who in the wonderful Sacrament of the Al- 
tar hast left us a living memorial of Thine eternal 


206 ADMINISTRATION 


Sacrifice; grant us, we beseech Thee, so to venerate 
the sacred mystery of Thy Body and Blood that we 
may ever perceive within ourselves the power of 
Thine indwelling life, and thus, by the glad pouring 
out of our lives in sacrifice, may know ourselves to 
be one with Thee and through Thee with all that lives ; 
Who livest and réignest with the Father in the unity 
of the Holy Spirit, God, throughout all ages of 
ages. R. Amen. 


The Priest blesses the people with a Particle, as he 
Says: 


+ Ye that desire to partake of the Body of the Lord, 
draw nigh and receive this most holy Sacrament. 


He administers the Holy Communion to them in the 
usual manner, and when all have recewed, he says: 


Under the veil of earthly things now have we com- 
munion with our Lord Jesus Christ; soon with open 
face shall we behold Him, and rejoicing in His glory 
be made like unto Him. Then shall His true disciples 
be brought by Him with exceeding joy before the 
presence of His Father’s glory. 


If desired, the Communio and Postcommunio from the 


Lucharistic service, or other prayers, may be added. 
THE BENEDICTION 


P. The peace of God, which passeth all understand- 
ing, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge 
and love of God, and of His Son, Christ our Lord; 
and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, 
the Son and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and re- 
main with you always. R. Amen. 


a 








VESPERS 


x | Vespers is one of the ancient canonical hours of the 
Church, or portions of the Divine Office recited as an 


act of devotion. These are: Matins, Lauds, Prime, 
Terce, Sext, None, Vespers, Complin. Vespers has 
become the most popular of these, being well adapted 
to use as a public evening service. 

The Psalms, heralded by the key-thoughts of their re- 
spective antiphons, serve to attune the mind to the glory 


of the Deity. The Little Chapter and Hymn intro- 


duce other notes. Then the whole culminates in the 
great outpouring of praise at the Te Deum, and comes 
to a fitting conclusion in the peace and calm of the Col- 
lects and final versicles. 

The service follows somewhat closely the structure of 
the Latin original, but the component matter is differ- 
ent. The Psalms, for example, are a cento. 





THE INVOCATION 


The people stand. - 

Priest. In the Name of the Father, »4 and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 

After the Priest has reached the sedilia the service 
proceeds as follows: 
. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 
Who hath made heaven and earth. 
. Trust ye in the Lord for ever. 
For He is our Rock of Ages. 
. Blessed are the pure in heart. 
For they shall see God. 
. The Lord be with you. 
, And with thy spirit. 

All. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


eHaAaHaAnAN 


208 VESPERS 
ea eee 
All are seated. ; : 

The Priest alone (or a cantor appointed by him) in 
all cases sings the first half of the first verse of each of 
the Psalms, the choir and people joining in at the second 
half. 

In order to avoid tiring the voices of the people, it 
is usual to sing the Psalms antiphonally , one half of the 
choir and people (generally those on the epistle side) 
singing the verses with odd numbers, and the other half 
those with even numbers. All join in the Gloria. 


THE FIRST PSALM OF PRAISE 


P. Let us sing to the praise and glory of God the 
First Psalm of Praise. 
Antiphon 

Praise ye the Lord. 

The Lord’s Name be praised. 

1. O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: sing 
praises unto His Name, for it is lovely. 

2. The Lord hath promised His blessing: and life 
for evermore. 

3, I will be glad and rejoice in Thee: yea, my songs 
will I make of Thy Name, O Thou most Highest. 

4. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful 


in my God: for He will cause righteousness and praise 
to spring forth in all nations. 


5. We give Thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty: 
Who wert, and art, and art to come, 

6. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and 
honour and power: for Thou hast created all things. 

7. Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord God 
Almighty: just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of 
Saints. 

8. O Lord God of Hosts: blessed is the man that 
putteth his trust in Thee. 


All, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


VESPERS 209 





As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be:” world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
Praise ye the Lord. 
The Lord’s Name be praised. 





THE PSALM OF GODLY LIFE 


P. Let us sing to the praise and glory of God the 
Psalm of Godly Life. 


Antiphon 


The Lord upholdeth the righteous. 
And his inheritance shall endure for ever. 


1. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is: breth- 
ren, to dwell together in unity. 

2. The integrity of the upright shall guide him: 
the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way. 

3. Righteousness tendeth to life: and to him that 
soweth it there shall be a sure reward. 

4. Glorious is the fruit of good labours: and the 
root of wisdom shall never fall away. 

5. Thou shalt show me the path of life; in Thy 
Presence is the fullness of joy: and at Thy right hand 
there is pleasure for evermore, 

6. I will behold Thy Presence in righteousness: and 
when I wake up after Thy likeness, I shall be satis- 
fied with it. 

7. The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord: and 
the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the king- 
dom of their Father. 

8. The Lord shall be their everlasting light: and 
their God their glory. 

9. Let your light so shine before men that they may 
see your good works: and glorify your Father Who is 
in heaven. 


210 VESPERS 
a eee es 


10. For every good gift and every perfect gift is 
from above: and cometh down from the Father of 
Lights, in Whom is no variableness, neither shadow 
of turning. 

11. The path of the just is as the shining light: 
shining more and more unto the perfect day. 

12. The souls of the righteous are in the hand of 
God: and there shall no torment touch them. 

13. In the sight of the unwise they seem to die, and 
their departure is taken for misery: but they are in 
peace. 

14 For God created man to be immortal: and made 
him to be an image of His own eternity. : 


All. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and 
to the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 


The Lord upholdeth the righteous. 
And his inheritance shall endure for ever. 





THE SECOND PSALM OF PRAISE. 


P. Let us sing to the praise and glory of God the 
Second Psalm of Praise. ; 


Antiphon 
Praise ye the Lord. 
The Lord’s Name be praised. 


1. O praise the Lord, for it is a good thing te sing 
praises unto our God: yea, a joyful and pleasant 
thing it is to be thankful. 


2. Great is our Lord, and great is His power: yea, 
and His wisdom is infinite. 


3. O sing unto the Lord a new song: let the con- 
gregation of saints praise Him. 


VESPERS 211 


4. Young men and maidens, old men and children, 
praise the Name of the Lord: for His Name only is 
excellent, and His praise above heaven and earth. 


All. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and 
to the Holy Ghost. : 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
Praise ye the Lord. 
The Lord’s Name be praised. 





THE PSALM OF WISDOM 


P. Let us sing to the praise and glory of God the 
Psalm of Wisdom. 


Antiphon 


From Thee cometh victory and wisdom. 

And Thine, O Lord, is the glory. 

1. Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever: 
He giveth their wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge 
to them that know understanding. 

2. He revealeth the deep and secret things: He 
knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwell- 
eth with Him. 

3. Wisdom is the breath of the power of God: and 
a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Al- 
mighty. : 

4. Wisdom is the brightness of the everlasting 
light: the unspotted mirror of the power of God, 
and the image of His goodness. i 

5. Wisdom reacheth from one end of the world to 
the other: mightily and sweetly doth she order all 
things. “aN 

6. Being but one, she can do all things: remaining 
in herself, she maketh all things new. 

7. Into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter: nor 
dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. 


212 VESPERS 


8. Wisdom entereth into holy souls: she maketh 
them prophets and friends of God. 


9. For God loveth him: that dwelleth with wisdom. 


10. He that loveth wisdom loveth life: and they 
that seek her early shall be filled with’ joy. 

11. He that holdeth her fast shall inherit glory: 
and wheresoever she entereth the Lord will bless. 

12. Wisdom is more beautiful than the sun, and 
above all the order of the stars: being compared with 
the light, she is found before it. 

13. They that serve her shall minister to the Holy 
One: and them that love her the Lord doth love. 

14. Wisdom is the rose of Sharon: and_ the lily of 
the valley. 

15. She is more precious than rubies: and all the 
things that thou canst desire are not to be compared 
to her. 

16. She is the mother of fair love: and of patience 
and perseverance, and of holy hope. 

17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness: and all 
her paths are peace. 

18. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness 
of the firmament; but they that turn many to right- 
eousness as the stars for ever and ever. 

All. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 


From Thee cometh victory and wisdom. 
And Thine, O Lord, is the glory. 





THE THIRD PSALM OF PRAISE 


P. Let us sing to the praise and glory of God the 
Third Psalm of Praise. 


VESPERS 213 





Antiphon : 

Praise ye the Lord. 

The Lord’s Name be praised. 

1. O praise God in His holiness: praise Him in the 
firmament of His power. 

2. Praise Him, all ye Angels of His: praise Him, 
all His host. 

3. Praise Him in His noble acts: praise Him ac- 
cording to His excellent greatness. 

4. Let everything that hath breath: praise the 
Lord. 

All. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and 
to the Holy Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 

The people rise. 
Antiphon 

Praise ye the Lord. 

The Lord’s Name be praised. 


THE LITTLE CHAPTER 
P. Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of 
God, and everyone that loveth is born of God, and 
knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; 
for God is love. And this commandment have we from 
Him, that he who loveth God love his brother also. 


C. Thanks be to God. 
HYMN ; 
O Trinity of burning light, 
Shine Thou within our hearts this night; 
The fiery sun sinks in the west, 
Grant us in Thee in peace to rest, 


To Thee our morning song of praise, 
To Thee our evening hymn we raise; 
Thy love supernal we adore, 
For ever and for evermore. 


214 VESPERS 


ee EE ——————————— 
Praise God from Whom all blessings flow, 
Praise Him all creatures here below, 
Praise Him above, ye heavenly Host, 
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 

: Amen. 
TE DEUM LAUDAMUS 
Antiphon 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God. 


With all thy heart and with all thy strength. 


The Priest sings half of the first verse of the Te 
Deum, and then censes the Altar while the people con- 
tinue. 


1. We praise Thee, O God: we acknowledge Thee to 
be the Lord. 


2. All the earth doth worship Thee: the Father 
everlasting. 


38. To Thee all Angels sing aloud: the heavens 
and all the powers therein. 


4, To Thee Cherubim and Seraphim: continually 
do cry, 


5. Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Hosts. 


6. Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of 
Thy glory. 


7. The glorious company of the apostles: praise 
Thee. 


8. The goodly fellowship of the prophets: praise 
Thee. 


9. The noble army of martyrs: praise Thee. 


10. The holy Church throughout all the world: doth 
acknowledge Thee. 


11. The Father: of an infinite majesty. 
12. Thine honourable, true: and only Son. 
13. Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter. 
14. Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ. 


VESPERS 215 


15. Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father. 


16. Thou sittest at the right hand of God: in the 
glory of the Father. 


17. Thou art Alpha and Omega: Thou first and 
last of all. ; 


18. Offspring and root of David: ‘Thou bright and 
morning Star. 


19. Day by day: we magnify Thee. 


20. And we worship Thy Name: ever world with- 
out end. 


21, Thou Who from Both dost come: O God the Holy 
Ghost, 


22. Thee, too, O Paraclete: we worship and adore. 


23. Thou art the Fount of Life: the living Fire of 
love. : 


24, Three in One: most holy Lord and God. 


25. Co-equal, co-eternal: before beginning and with- 
out an end. ; 


26. We Thy servants live in Thee: and all ‘we 
have .is Thine. 


27. We. bless Thee, we magnify Thee: most joy- 
ously we serve Thee. 


28. O mighty, glorious Trinity: let all the people 
praise Thee. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen, 
Antiphon 


Thou shalt love the Lord thy God. 
With all thy heart and with all thy strength. 
P. The Lord be with you. 

Cc. And with thy spirit. 





216 VESPERS 





THE COLLECTS 
P. Let us pray. 
All kneel. 


The Collect of “the Day is said, followed by this 
Collect for Peace. 


Teach us, O Lord, to see Thy life in all men and in 
all the peoples of Thine earth, and guide our nation 
through its leaders to preserve Thy peace, that the 
menace of war be far from our days, through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


The following collects may be recited if desired; 
but if Complin is to be said immediately afterwards, 
they shall be recited in that office and not im this 
place. ; 


P. O God, from Whom all holy desires, all good 
counsels and all just works do proceed; give unto Thy 
servants that peace which the world cannot give; 
both that our hearts may be set to obey Thy com- 
mandments, and also that by Thee we being defended 
from the fear of all evil may pass this night in rest 
and quietness. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


P. Almighty God, the Protector of all who trust in 
Thee, send forth Thy power to keep us this night both 
outwardly in our bodies and inwardly in ourselves; 
that so far as is expedient for us we may be defended 
from all adversities which may happen to the body, 
and from all evil thoughts which may assault and 
hurt the soul. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


P. Almighty God, Who hast given us grace at this 
time with one accord to make our common supplica- 
tions unto Thee; and dost promise that where two or 
three are gathered together in Thy Name, there art 
Thou in the midst of them: Fulfil now, O Lord, the 
desires and petitions of Thy servants, as may be most 
expedient for them; granting us in this world know- 
ledge of Thy truth and in the world to come life ever- 
lasting. R. Amen. | 


VESPERS 217 


P. Let us bless the Lord. 
C. Henceforth and for evermore. 


P. + May the souls of the departed through the 
love of God rest in peace. 


Cc. Amen. 
P. The Lord give us His peace. 
C. And life everlasting. 


If Benediction of the Most Holy Sacrament is to be 
celebrated, the Priest intones the following ‘‘Grace,’’ 
after which may follow a sermon and a hymn. 


The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the 
love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, 
be with us all evermore. R. Amen. 


If there is to be no service of Benediction the Priest 
omits the ‘‘Grace’ and proceeds immediately with the 
sermon, if any. He then intones the following Bless- 
ing. 

Unto God’s gracious love and protection we commit 
you: the Lord > bless you and keep you; the 
Lord make His Face to shine upon you and be grac- 
ious unto you; the Lord lift up the light of His Coun- 
tenance upon you and give you His peace, now and for 
evermore. R. Amen. 





If it is desired to sing a hymn it may precede the 
Blessing or follow it as a recessional. 


BENEDICTION OF THE MOST 
HOLY SACRAMENT 


In this service the people receive the blessing of 
Christ Himself through the Most Holy Sacrament. The 
latter is first exposed in the monstrance for the adora- 
tion and veneration of the people. Then the Priest, 
covering his hands with the humeral veil, takes the mon- 
strance, and gives the Solemn Benediction. The greatest 
devotion should mark this service. 

Sometimes the Host is carried in procession. 


THE INVOCATION 


. P. In the Name of the Father, > and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


The people kneel. The Priest removes the’ Most 
Holy Sacrament from the tabernacle and places LY im the 
monstrance. 


All kneel, and the Priest offers incense before the 
Most Holy Sacrament. Meanwhile the people sing the 
following hymn, or, tf there be no music, it is said after 
the censing: 

O SALUTARIS HOSTIA 


O Saving Victim, opening wide 
The gate of heaven to man below, 

Our foes press in from every side; 
Thine aid supply, Thy strength bestow. 


All praise and thanks to Thee ascend 
For evermore, blest One in Three; 
O grant us life that shall not end 
In our true native land with Thee. Amen. 


The following Litany is sung, the people kneeling. If 
_ there is to be a Procession of the Most Holy Sacrament, 

tt takes place during the Litany, the Host being car- 
ried under a Canopy. If it be convenient the Priest 
alone (or a cantor appointed by him) may sing the 
first, third, fifth, and other verses bearing odd nwm- 
bers, the even verses being sung by the choir and the 
people. 


SOLEMN BENEDICTION 219 


LITANY 
if 
God the Father, seen of none, 
God the co-eternal Son, 
God the Spirit—Three in One, 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 
2 
Son of God and Prince of Light, 
Throned in glory, robed in might, 
Morning Star, serene and bright, - 
Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


3 
Captain of the Hosts of Light, 
Overcoming sin’s dark blight, 
Ever-glowing splendour bright, 
Son of God, we hail Thee, 


4 


Thou, before Whose purging ray 
Mists of evil fade away; 
Orb of everlasting day, 

Son of God, we hail Thee. 


5 


Thou, Whose wisdom all things planned, 
Held by Whose almighty Hand 
All things in their order stand, 

We, Thy Church, adore Thee, 


6 


Thou, Whose life and strength pervade 
Whatsoever Thou hast made, 
All-Preserver, strong to aid, 

We, Thy Church, adore Thee, 


7 
Thou, Whose beauty, like a star 
Throbbing in the void afar, 


Only earth-born clouds can mar, 
We, Thy Church, adore Thee, 


220 


SOLEMN BENEDICTION 


8 
Thou, Whose universal might 
Saints acclaim with mystic rite, 
Clad in robes of dazzling light, 
Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


9 
Thou, for Whom, in heavenly choir, 
Angel forms of living fire 
Wake the everlasting lyre, 
Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


10 
Lord of Wisdom, from Whose lore 
Wisest men of earth may store 
Riches new for evermore, 
We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


aia 


Still in bounty, Lord, bestow 
Blessings on Thy Church below, 
Till her measure overflow; 

King of Glory, hear us. 


12 


King of Salem, Priest Divine, 

Thou, Whose love hath sealed us Thine 

Through Thy mystic Bread and Wine, 
We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


13 


Priest and Victim, Whom of old 
Type and prophecy foretold, 
Thee Incarnate we behold; 

Son of God, we hail Thee. 


14. 


Purged in vision through Thy grace 
We by faith may see Thy Face, 
Feel Thee near in every place, 

Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


SOLEMN BENEDICTION 221 


15 


Ruth divine that givest heed 

Unto every cry of need, 

Healing balm to hearts that bleed, 
Help us, holy Master, 


16 


Healer of the souls distressed, 

Happiness of all the blest, 

Peace of those who long for rest; 
We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


17 


Sweet Physician, skilled to heal 

Every pang the soul can feel, 

Thou that hearest each appeal; 
Help us, holy Master. 


18 


Lest by thought or action base, 

Ignorant, we slight Thy grace, 

Lest we hide from us Thy Face, 
Help us, holy Master, 


19 


That our hearts may win release, 

That our hands from ill may cease, 

That our souls may know Thy peace, 
Help us, holy Master. 


20 


That from selfish lusts made free 

Each, at length, clear-eyed may see— 

See, and tread, the path to Thee, 
Help us, holy Master. 


21 


Till, our pilgrimage complete, 

Rest shall come and comfort sweet, 

Friend of pilgrims, at Thy Feet, 
Son of God, we hail Thee. 


922 SOLEMN BENEDICTION 


22 


God the Father, seen of none, 

God the co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit—Three in One, 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


A time may be set apart at this place for meditation. 


The following hymn is neat sung, a few moments’ 
pause being made if it follows directly upon the 
Litany. After the first verse, the officiant again puts 
incense into the thurible and censes the Blessed Sacra- 
ment as before, during which action the people con- 
tinue the second verse; but if there be no music a 
pause is observed until after the censing. 


The people remain kneeling. 


TANTUM ERGO, 
(At the second line all bow low in adoration) 


Therefore we, before Him bending, 
This great Sacrament revere, 

Types and shadows have their ending, 
For the newer rite is here. 

Faith, our outward sense befriending, 
Makes our inward. vision clear. 


Glory let us give, and blessing, 
To the Father and the Son, 
Honour, might, and praise addressing, 
While eternal ages run; 
Ever, too, His love confessing, 
Who from Both with Both is One. Amen. 


P. Thou didst give them bread from heaven. 

C. Containing within itself all sweetness. 

P. O Lord Christ, Thou Hidden Dweller in the hu- 
man spirit: 

C. Open Thine eyes in us, that we may see. 

P. O God, who in the wonderful Sacrament of the - 


Altar hast left us a living memorial of Thine eternal 
Sacrifice; grant us, we beseech Thee, so to venerats the 





_SOLEMN BENEDICTION 223 


a 
sacred mystery of Thy Body and Blood that we may 


ever perceive within ourselves the power of Thine 
indwelling life, and thus, by the glad pouring out of our 
lives in sacrifice, may know ourselves to be one with 
Thee, and through Thee with all that lives; Who livest 
and reignest with the Father in the unity of the Holy 
Spirit, God throughout all ages of ages. BR. Amen. 


When this Service of Benediction follows immediately 
after Vespers the following Prayer for Peace has been 
already said, and will therefore be omitted in this place. 


P. Teach us, O Lord, to see Thy life in all men, 
and. in all the peoples of Thine earth, and- guide our 
nation through its leaders to preserve Thy peace, that 
the menace of war be far from our days, through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


THE ASCRIPTION 


P. To the most: holy and adorable Trinity, Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit, three Persons in one God; to 
Christ our Lord, the only wise Counsellor, the Prince 
of Peace; to the seven mighty Spirits before the 
throne; and to the glorious Assembly of just men 
made perfect, the Watchers, the Saints, the Holy Ones, 
be praise unceasing from every living creature; and 
honour, might and glory, henceforth and-for ever- 
more. R. Amen. 

THE SOLEMN BENEDICTION 
is giwen. 

After the Benediction and while the Most Holy Sac- 
rament ts being placed in the tabernacle, the follow- 
ing Psalm is sung. If there be no music it is said 
after the Host has been placed in the tabernacle. 

All stand. 

PSALM 
Antiphon 

O come, let us adore Him. 

Christ the Lord. 

1. O praise the Lord, all ye His servants: praise 
Him, all ye nations. 


224 SOLEMN BENEDICTION 


2. For His lovingkindness is ever more and more 
towards us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for 
ever. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 


O come, let us adore Him. 
Christ the Lord. 


The following hymn may be sung either as a retro- 
cessional or before the procession passes out. 


CLOSING HYMN 


Closed is the solemn hour, 
The sacred rites are done: 
And lo! the music of Thy power 
Thrills through us, every one. 
O Master, let that harmony 
Sing through the lives we lead for Thee ! 


And now with reverent pace, 
Our strength renewed by Thine, 
Devoted guardians of Thy Grace, 
Quit we this holy shrine, 
And pass into the silent night, 
To be the bearers of Thy light. Amen. 


This service may be considerably shortened, the O | 
Salutaris Hostia, the Tantwm Ergo, the Versicles and | 
Responses and Prayer which follow, and the. act of 
Benediction being the only portions of liturgical ob- 
ligation. It is permitted to give the Benediction with 
the veiled ciborium. 


PRIME 


As already indicated in the introduction to Vespers, 
Prime is one of the morning, and Complin one of the 
evening, Offices of the Church. The greater services, 
such as the Holy Eucharist, Vespers and Benediction, 
are intended principally to pour out spiritual strength 
upon the world, whereas these minor Offices may not un- 
reasonably be regarded as designed especially for the 
benefit of those who take part in them. 


Prime and Complin are short services, which can be 
led by a layman if necessary, and would therefore. be 
eminently suited for a community Office, for family 
prayers, or for use by a schoolmaster who wished to 
say morning or evening prayers with his boys. They 
also, of course, lend themselves to use in Church; Prime, 
when the Holy Eucharist cannot be celebrated, or as 
a preparation therefor, and Complin as an addition 
to Vespers,-or when Vespers and Benediction are un- 
suitable, as on the evening of Good Friday. 


In order to avoid constant repetition, where Prime 
and Complin are said daily, or where Prime is used in 
conjunction with the Holy Eucharist, other short lec- 
tions selected from any part of this book may at the 
discretion of the Priest be read as lessons instead of 
the Epistle and Gospel. 


The people stand. 
THE INVOCATION 

The Priest—or, if there be no Priest present, the 
ministrant im charge—intones: 

In the Name of the Father, 44 and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 

P. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 

C. Who hath made heaven and earth. 

P. At morn and at even will we praise Him. 

C. For our hearts rest ever in His love. 


226 PRIME 
nn SE ee SNE 


CONFITEOR 
All kneel, and say: 


O Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
made him to be an image of Thine own eternity; yet 
often we forget the glory of our heritage, and wan- 
der from the path which leads to righteousness. But 
Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and our 
hearts are ever restless till they find their rest in 
Thee. Look with the eyes of Thy love upon our mani- 
fold imperfections, and pardon all our shortcomings, 
that we may be filled with the brightness of the ever- 
lasting light, and become the unspotted mirror of Thy 
power and the image of Thy goodness. Through Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


THE ABSOLUTION 


P. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, 
bless, + preserve and sanctify you; the Lord in 
His lovingkindness look down upon you and be gra- 
cious unto you; the Lord HX absolve you from all 
your sins, and grant you the grace and comfort of 
the Holy Spirit. R. Amen. 


(If there be no Priest, the ministrant, still kneel- 
ing, says the following instead of the Absolution: 


May the Lord bless us, and XH absolve us from all 


our sins; and may His peace rest upon us this day and 
evermore. 


C. Thanks be to God.] 





THE FIRST PSALM 
The people stand, and the Psalm is sung. 
Antiphon 


Ye shall stand every morning to thank and praise 
the Lord. 


At morning and likewise at even. 


PRIME ; 227 





1. O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily 
rejoice in the strength of our salvation. 


2. Let us come before His presence with thanks- 
giving: and show ourselves glad in Him with psalms. 

3. The sea is His, and He made it: and His hands 
prepared the dry land. 

4. He is the Lord our God: and we are the people 
of His pasture, and the sheep of His Hand. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 
Antiphon 


Ye shall stand every morning to thank and praise 
the Lord. 


At morning and likewise at even. 
THE LESSON 


All are seated, and the Epistle of the Day is read 
as a lesson by the Priest or ministrant, or some one ap- 
pointed by him. 

THE SECOND PSALM 
After that is sung the following, all standing. 


Antiphon 

The morning stars sang together. 

And all the sons of God shouted for joy. 

1. My voice shalt Thou hear in the morning, O Lord: 
I will direct my prayer unto Thee, and look up. 

2. I will sing of Thy power: and will praise Thy 
lovingkindness betimes in the morning. 

8. In the evening and morning and at noonday will 
I call: and He shall hear my voice. 

4, The tenderness of the Lord is new every morn- 
ing: great, O Lord, is Thy faithfulness. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 

H2 


228 PRIME 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
The morning stars Sang together. 
And all the sons of God shouted for joy. 
THE SECOND LESSON, 


Lhe people are seated, and the Gospel of the Day is 
read as the second lesson. 


AN ACT OF FAITH 

The people rise, and all intone: 

We believe that God is Love, and Power and Truth 
and Light; that perfect justice rules the world: 
that all His sons shall one day reach His Feet, how- 
ever far they stray. We hold the Fatherhood of God, 
the Brotherhood of man; we know that we do serve 
Him best when best we serve our brother man. So 
shall His blessing rest on us, > and peace for ever- 
more. Amen. 


Any of the Creeds or Acts of Faith given on p. 166 et 
seq. may be substituted for the above if desired. 


THE COLLECTS 
P. Let us pray. 


All kneel. If a ministrant leads the service, he kneels 
with the people. 


First is intoned the Collect for the Day, and then 
the following: 


P. O Lord, our heavenly Father, almighty and’ ev- 
erlasting God, Who hast safely brought us to the be- 
ginning of this day; defend us in the same with Thy 
mighty power, and grant that this day we may man- 
fully strive against sin and selfishness, that all our 
doings may be ordered by Thy governance, to do al- 
ways that which is righteous in Thy sight. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


PRIME 229 





P. O Lord Christ, we Thy faithful soldiers dedicate 
this new-born day to Thee, praying that it may shine 
in Thy service as a pure pearl in the chaplet of our 
life, O Thou great King of Love, to Whom be praise- 
and adoration for evermore. R. Amen. 


P. Teach us, O Lord, to see Thy life in all men 
and in all the peoples of Thine earth, and guide our 
nation through its leaders to preserve Thy peace, that 
the menace of war be far from our days, through 
Christ our Lord. KR. Amen. 


THE OFFICE HYMN. 
All rise and sing: 


Now that the daylight fills the sky 
We lift our hearts to Thee on high, 
That Thou, in all we do or say, 

Wilt keep us free from harm to-day. 


May we restrain our tongues from strife 
And shield from anger’s din our life; 
And guard with watchful care our eyes 
From earth’s absorbing vanities, 


May this day, dedicate to Thee, 
A day of joyous service be; 

Forgetting self for love of man 
May we fulfil Thy glorious plan. 


Praise God from Whom all blessings flow; 
Praise Him, all creatures here below; 

Praise Him above, ye heavenly Host, 

Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. 


If there is to be a sermon, it is delivered here. 
THE THIRD PSALM 
The people stand and sing: 


Antiphon 


Heaviness may endure for a night. 
But joy cometh in the morning. 





230 PRIME = 
1. The just man shall be as the li’ 
ing: even a morning without cloud: 


2. As the tender grass springing | 
as clear shining after rain, 


3. The righteous shall be clearer th 
he shall shine forth, he shall be as the 


4. His light shall break forth as 
righteousness shall go before him, am 
the Lord shall be his rereward. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: 4a. 
the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 
Antiphon 

Heaviness may endure for a night. 

But joy cometh in the morning. 


P. Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 


P. Be with us, Lord, throughout this day, that in 
all our work, begun, continued and ended in Thee, we 
may glorify Thy holy Name, Who livest for ever and 
ever. R. Amen. 


They remain kneeling. 


. Breathe on us, O Spirit of God. 

In Thy strength we can do all things. 

- May our hearts be filled with Thy love. 
. In Thy strength we can do all things. 


away 


P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


C. In Thy strength we can do all things. 


COMPLIN 231 


THE BENEDICTION 


P. Unto God’s gracious love and protection we com- 
mit you; the Lord > bless you and keep you; the 
Lord make His Face to shine upon you and be gra- 
cious unto you; the Lord lift up the light of His Coun- 
tenance upon you and give you His peace, this day 
and for evermore. R. Amen. 





[In the absence of a Priest, the ministrant closes 
the service with the following words, imstead of the 
Benediction: : 


The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love 
of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with 
us all evermore. R. Amen.]| 


When it may be desired to shorten this service, as, 
for example, in the case of school or family prayers, 
any or all of the following may be omitted: the two 
Lessons, the Second and the Third Psalm, the Office 
Hymn. In such case, the Second or Third Psalm may 
be substituted, if desired, for the First. 





COMPLIN 


The people stand. 
THE INVOCATION 


The Priest—or, if there be no Priest present, the 
ministrant in charge—intones: 


In the Name of the Father )} and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


P. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 
C. Who hath made heaven and earth. 

“p, At morn and at even will we praise Him. 
C. For our hearts rest ever in His love. 


232 COMPLIN 
2S ae aetna 2 Se eet 


CONFITEOR 
All kneel, and say: 


O Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
made him to be an image of Thine own eternity; yet 
often we forget the glory of our heritage, and wan- 
der from the path which leads to righteousness. But 
Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and our 
hearts are ever restless till they find their rest in 
Thee. Look with the eyes of Thy love upon our mani- 
fold imperfections, and pardon all our shortcomings, 
that we may be filled with the brightness of the ever- 
lasting light, and become the unspotted mirror of Thy 
power and the image of Thy goodness. Through Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


THE ABSOLUTION 


P. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy 
Ghost, bless, + preserve and sanctify you; the Lord 
in His lovingkindness look down upon you and be 
gracious unto you; the Lord 4 absolve you from 
all your sins, and grant you the grace and comfort 

of the Holy Spirit. R. Amen. 





[If there be no Priest, the ministrant, still kneeling, 
says the following instead of the Absolution: 


May the Lord bless us, and »} absolve us from all 
our sins; and may His peace rest upon us this night 
and evermore. 


C. Thanks be to God.] 


THE FIRST PSALM 
Lhe people stand, and the Psalm is sung. 
Antiphon 
Thou art my lamp, O Lord. 
The Lord will lighten my darkness. 


1. Behold, the night falleth: and darkness cover- 
eth the earth. 


COMPLIN 233 





2. But Thy candle, O Lord, shineth upon my head: 
and by Thy light I walk through the darkness. 


3. Thou hast brought us out of darkness, and out 
of the shadow of death: and broken our bonds in 
sunder. 


4, Yea, the darkness is no darkness with Thee, but 
the night is as clear as the day: the darkness and the 
light to Thee are both alike. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 
Antiphon 

Thou art my lamp, O Lord. 

The Lord will lighten my darkness. 


THE LESSON 


All are seated, and the Epistle of the Day is read 
as a lesson by the Priest or ministrant, or some one 
appointed by him. 


THE SECOND PSALM 
After that is sung the following, all standing: 


Antiphon 

He hath called’ us out of darkness. 

Into His marvellous light. 

1. Who is there that walketh in darkness: and 
hath no light ? 

2. Let him trust in the Lord: and stay upon his 
God. : 
' 3, Unto the godly there ariseth up light in the 
darkness: he is merciful, loving and righteous. 

4. I am the Light of the world, saith the Lord: 
he that followeth Me shall not walk in darkness, but 
shall have the light of life.: 


234 COMPLIN 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
He hath called us out of darkness. 


Into His marvellous light. 


THE SECOND LESSON 


The people are seated, and the Gospel of the Day 
is read as the second lesson. 


AN ACT OF FAITH 
The people rise, and all intone: 


We believe that God is Love, and Power and Truth 
and Light; that perfect justice rules the world; that 
all His sons shall one day reach His Feet, however 
far they stray. We hold the Fatherhood of God, the 
Brotherhood of man; we know that we do serve Him 
best when best we serve our brother man. So shall 
His blessing rest on us, + and peace for evermore. 
Amen. 


Any of the Creeds or Acts of Faith given on p. 166 
et seq. may be substituted for the above if desired. 


THE COLLECTS 
P. Let us pray. 


All kneel. If a ministrant leads the service, he 
kneels with the people. 


The Collect for the Day is first said. 


P. O God, from Whom all holy desires, all good 
counsels and all just works do proceed; give unto Thy 
servants that peace which the world cannot give; both 
that our hearts may be set to obey Thy command- 
ments, and that by Thee we being defended from the 


COMPLIN 235 





fear of all evil may pass this night in rest and quiet- 
ness. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


P. Almighty God, the Protector of all who trust in 
Thee, send forth Thy power to keep us this night both 
outwardly in our bodies and inwardly in ourselves; 
that so far as is expedient for us we may be defend- 
ed from all adversities which may happen to the body, 
and from all evil thoughts which may assault and 
hurt the soul. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


P. Teach us, O Lord, to see Thy life in all men 
and in all the peoples of Thine earth, and guide our 
nation through its leaders to preserve Thy peace, that 
the menace of war be far from our days, through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


THE OFFICE HYMN. 
All rise and sing: 


Glory to Thee, my God, this night 
For all the blessings of the light; 
Keep me, O keep me, King of Kings, 
Beneath Thine own almighty wings. 


Assoil me, Lord, from every sin, 

And fill my heart with love within, 
That with the world, myself and Thee, 
I, ere I sleep, at peace may be. 


If in the night I sleepless lie 

My mind with heavenly thoughts supply; 
Let no ill dreams disturb my rest, 

Nor powers of darkness me molest. 


Praise God from Whom all blessings flow; 
Praise Him, all creatures here below; 

Praise Him above, ye heavenly Host, 
Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Amen, 


If there is to be a sermon, it is delivered here. 


236 COMPLIN 


NUNC DIMITTIS 
The people stand and sing: 





Antiphon 
I will lay me down in peace and take my rest. 


For it is Thou, Lord, only that makest me to dwell 
in safety. 


1. Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in 
peace: according to Thy word. 


2. For mine eyes have seen: Thy salvation; 


3. Which Thou hast prepared: before the face 
of all people; 


4. To be a light to lighten the Gentiles: and to be 
the glory of Thy people Israel. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, ig now, and ever shall 
“be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
I will lay me down in peace and take my rest. 


For it is Thou, Lord, only that makest me to dwell 
in safety. 


P. Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 


P. Be with us in our homes, O Lord, and let Thy 
holy Angels dwell therein, to preserve us in peace; 
and let Thy blessing rest ever upon us, O Thou Lord 
of love, Who livest for ever and ever. R. Amen. 


They remain kneeling. 
P. Look, O Lord, upon this Thy family. 
C. Into Thy Hands I commend my spirit. 


P. Protect us under the shadow of Thy wings. 
C. Into Thy Hands I commend my spirit. 


COMPLIN 237 


P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


C. Into Thy Hands I commend my spirit. 
THE BENEDICTION 


P. Unto God’s gracious love and protection we 
commit you; the Lord » bless you and keep you; 
the Lord make His Face to shine upon you and be 
gracious unto you; the Lord lift up the light of His 
Countenance upon you and give you His: peace, this 
night and for evermore. R. Amen. 





[In the absence of a Priest, the ministrant closes 
the service with the following words, instead of the 
Benediction: 

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the 
love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, 
be with us all evermore. R. Amen. 


When it may be desired to shorten this service, as, 
for example, in the case of school or family prayers, 
any or all of the following may be omitted: the two 
Lessons, the First and Second Psalm, the Office Hymn. 
The Nunc Dimittis should always be said.] 


HOLY BAPTISM 


Baptism is a Sacrament by which the recipient is 
solemnly admitted to membership of Christ’s holy Church 
and ‘‘grafted into His mystical body.”? 


The Exorcism is intended to deaden the germs of 
evil in infants, or to effect a preliminary purification 
in those more advanced in years. 


The first Anointing is, as indicated, for the strength- 
ening and safeguarding of the candidate, and is fol- 
lowed immediately by the Baptism in the Name of the 
Trinity, and then by the second Anointing with holy 
chrism, still further to strengthen him. 

Where there is doubt about the validity or complete- 
ness of a former Baptism, the Sacrament is re-adminis- 
tered conditionally. 

The pouring of the water symbolizes both the wash- 
ing away of sin and the downpouring of power from 
on high. The font is usually placed near the entrance 
of the church to show that by Baptism we gain admis- 
sion to the Church of God. 


So far as is convenient, holy Baptism should be ad- 
ministered publicly in the presence of a congregation. 





FORM TO BE USED FOR INFANTS 


Instructions to Parents 
The head of the child should be uncovered, and the 
~ “dress somerranged that the oil of catechumens can be 
applied on the»eck or breast before and at the nape 
of the neck behind: 
It is customary thas the ‘‘white vesture’’ shall be a 
white silk handkerchieéi, »resented by the godparents. 


This is to be blessed bY the Priest and is retained By 
the child in memory of hs Baptism. 


For each child to be babized there should be a god- 
father and godmother, who ‘ay the words of presenta- 
tion respectively, according towhether the child be male 
or female. 








BAPTISM OF INFANTS 239 


THE INVOCATION 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, > and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


THE PRESENTATION 
The child is presented as follows: 


Sponsor. Reverend Father, we present to you this 
child, praying that you will receive him into the fel- 
lowship of Christ’s Church. 


P. Brethren, our fair Father Christ, in His great 
lovingkindness, hath ordained that His mystic Bride, 
our holy Mother the Church, shall guide and pro- 
tect her children at every stage from the cradle to 
the grave. To this end is the Sacrament of holy 
Baptism ordained, that in His Name the Church may 
give welcome and blessing to lim who is newly come 
into this world of pilgrimage, and that the soul may 
dwell in a body purified from the taint of evil, sanc- 
tified and set apart for the service of Almighty God. 





Addressing the sponsors and congregation: 


Therefore, brethren of Christ’s catholic Church, I 
pray you to join with me in this our holy rite, where- 
by this*child shall be made partaker of these heaven. 
ly gifts and a member of His mystical body. 


Hear the words of the Gospel written by St. Mark, 
in the tenth chapter, at the thirteenth verse. 


They brought young children to Christ, that He 
should touch them; and His disciples rebuked those 
that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, He 
was much displeased, and said unto them: Suffer 
the little children to come unto Me, and forbid them 
not; for of such is the kingdom of God. Amen, I 
say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the king- 
dom of God as a little child, he shall not enter there- 
in. And He took them up in His arms, put His 
hands upon them, and blessed them. 


The Priest places his right hand on the head of 
the child, and says: 


240 BAPTISM OF INFANTS 





Let us pray. 

O God, Omnipotent and Omnipresent, Whose power 
worketh in every living creature, Who alone art the 
source of all life and goodness, deign to shed upon 
this Thy servant, who has been called to the rudiments 
of the faith, a ray of Thy light; drive out from him 
all blindness of heart, break all the chains of iniquity 
wherewith he has been bound; open to him, O Lord, 
the gate of Thy glory, that being replenished with 
the spirit of Thy wisdom and strengthened by Thy 
mighty power, le may be free from the taint of evil 
desire, and steadfastly advancing in holiness may 
joyfully serve Thee in the course Thou hast appoint- 
ed for him. Through Christ our Lord. BR. Amen. 


THE EXORCISM 


P. In the Name which is above every name, in 
the power of the + Father, and of the + Son, and 
of the Holy + Ghost, I exorcize all influences and 
seeds of evil; I lay upon them the spell of Christ’s 
holy Church, that they may be bound fast as with 
iron chains and cast into outer darkness, that they 
trouble not this servant of God; 


He again places his hand on the head of the child. 


for He Who is the Lord of Love and Compassion 
hath deigned to call him to His holy grace and 
blessing and to the font of Baptism. 


The Priest then proceeds as follows: 
Ephphatha: that is, Be thou opened. 


Here the Priest makes the sign of the cross over the 
brow, the throat, the heart, and the navel of the child. 


Let thy mind and thy heart be opened to the most 
holy Spirit of the living God, that thy whole nature 
may be dedicated for ever to His service; so mayest 
thou have power to receive the heavenly precepts 
and to be such in thy conduct that thou mayest be 
a pure temple of the living God. 


N BAPTISM OF INFANTS 241 


He stretches out his right hand towards the child, 
and says: 


Do Thou, O Lord, with Thy ever-abiding power, 
watch over this Thy chosen servant, whom we dedi- 
cate to Thy service, that, using well the beginnings 
of Thy glory and heedfully observing Thy holy laws, 
he may be found worthy to attain to the fullness 
of the new birth. Through Christ our Lord. R. 
Amen. 


The Priest places the end of his stole upon the child’s 
shoulder, and says: 


Come into the temple of God, that thou mayest 
have part with Christ unto life eternal. 


THE FIRST ANOINTING 


The Priest takes upon his right thumb a little of the 
oil of catechumens. At the first two crosses the Priest 
touches respectively the child’s breast or throat and the 
nape of lis neck, making a small cross at each with the 
oil; he then makes two crosses respectively before and 
behind the child, reaching to the entire length of the 
body. 


P. In the Name of Christ our Lord, I +-+ anoint 
thee with oil for thy safeguarding; may His holy 
Angel + go before thee, and + follow after thee; 
may he be with thee in thy downsitting and thine 
uprising and keep thee in all thy ways. 


THE BAPTISM* 


While the godparents hold the child over the font, the 
Priest pours some of the consecrated baptismal water 
over the head and forehead of the child thrice. At 
the same time he pronounces the words: 


N., I baptize thee in the Name of the + Father, 
and of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. Amen. 





*Tf the Baptism be sub conditione the formula to 
be used is found in the form of Baptism for Children. 


242 BAPTISM OF INFANTS 


THE ANOINTING WITH CHRISM 


The Priest takes upon his thumb some of the sacred 
chrism, and, anointing the child on the top of the 
‘head in the form of a cross, says: 

With Christ’s holy chrism do I + anoint thee, that 
His strength may prevent thee in thy going out 
thy coming in, and may guide thee into life everlast- 
ing. 





THE RECEPTION 


With his thumb, still moist with chrism, the Priest 
makes a cross wpon the child’s brow; at the last clause 
he lays his hand upon the infant’s head. 

P. I receive this child into the fellowship of Christ’s 
holy Church and do + sign him with the sign of the 
cross in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed 
to confess the faith of Christ our Lord, to acknowledge 
Him when He shall come, and manfully to fight under 
His banner against sin and selfishness, and that he 
shall continue Christ’s faithful soldier and servant 
throughout the ages of ages. R. Amen. 


A white silk handkerchief is brought, and the 
Priest, having blessed it, places it upon the shoulders of 
the child, saying: 

Receive from holy Church this white vesture as a 
pattern of the spotless purity and brightness of Him 
Whose service thou hast entered to-day, and for a 
token of thy fellowship with Christ and His holy An- 
gels, that thy life may be filled with His peace. 

Delivering a lighted candle to the child, the Priest 
Says: 

Take this burning light, enkindled from the fire of 
God’s holy Altar, for a sign of the ever-burning light 
of thy spirit. God grant that hereafter His love shall 
so shine through thy heart that thou mayest contin- 
ually enlighten the lives of thy fellowmen. 

The Priest places has hand on the head of the child, 
saying - 

N., Go in peace, and may the Lord be with thee. 
R. Amen. 


BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 243 


THE CHARGE TO SPONSORS 

P. Ye who have brought this child here to be bap- 
tized, seeing that now he is regenerate of water and 
the Holy Spirit, and grafted into the mystical body 
of Christ’s Church, remember that there lies upon 
you a duty not lightly to be cast aside. It is your 
part to see that so soon as he is old enough to under- 
stand, he is taught God’s holy will and command- 
ment, as it was spoken by our Lord Himself when 
He said: ‘‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy 
mind and with all thy strength. This is the first 
and great commandment; and the second is like unto 
it: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On 
these two commandments hang all the law and the 
prophets.’’ 

Also he shall be taught the doctrine of the holy 
catholic Church, into which he has this day been ad- 
mitted, and shall be brought in due course before the 
Bishop to be confirmed by him. 





FORM TO BE USED FOR CHILDREN 


This form is to be used for children of four or five 
and upwards, who are able in some measure to under- 
stand the service. 

THE INVOCATION 

Priest. In the Name of the Father, 44 and of 

the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 
THE PRESENTATION 

The child is presented as follows: 

Sponsor. Reverend Father, we present to you this 
child, praying that you will receive him into the fel- 
lowship of Christ’s Church. 

P. Brethren, our fair Father Christ, in His great 
lovingkindness, hath ordained that His mystic Bride, 
our holy Mother the Church, shall guide and protect 
her children at every stage from the cradle to the 
grave. To this end is the Sacrament of holy Bap- 
tism ordained, that in His Name the Church may give 


244 BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 
ee ee ee eee 


welcome and blessing to him who is come into this 
world of pilgrimage, and that the soul may dwell in a 
body purified from the taint of evil, sanctified and 
set apart for the service of Almighty God. 

Turning to the people: 

Therefore, brethren of Christ’s catholic Church, I 
pray you to join with me in this our holy rite, where- 
by this child shall be made partaker of these heaven- 
ly gifts and a member of His mystical body, 

Hear the words of the Gospel written by St. Mark, 
in the tenth chapter, at the thirteenth verse. 

They brought young children to Christ, that He 
should touch them; and His disciples rebuked those 
that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, He was 
much displeased, and said unto them: Suffer the 
little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not; 
for of such is the kingdom of God. Amen, I say un- 
to you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of 
God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. And 
He took them up in His arms, put His hands upon 
them, and blessed them. 


The Priest places his right hand on the head of the 
child, and says: 

[*Let us pray. 

O God, Omnipotent and Omnipresent, Whose pow- 
er worketh in every living creature, Who alone art 
the source of all life and goodness, deign to shed 
upon this Thy servant, who has been called to the 
rudiments of the faith, a ray of Thy light: drive 
out from him all blindness of heart, break all the 
chains of iniquity wherewith he has been bound; open 
to him, O Lord, the gate of Thy glory, that, -being 
replenished with the spirit of Thy wisdom and 
strengthened by Thy mighty power, he may be free 
from the taint of evil desire, and steadfastly advanc- 
ing in holiness may joyfully serve Thee in the course 
Thou hast appointed for him.’ Through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen.] 


*The portion in brackets may be omitted. 








BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 245 
THE EXORCISM 


In the Name which is above every name, in the 
power of the + Father, and of the + Son, and of 
the Holy + Ghost, be you so purified that you may 
be rightly prepared to receive this first Sacrament of 
Christ’s holy Church; (the Priest places his hand on 
the head of the child) for He who is the Lord of 
Love and Compassion hath deigned to call you to 
His holy grace and blessing, and to the font of Bap- 
tism. 


He stretches out his right hand towards the child, 
and says: 


Do Thou, O Lord, with Thy ever-abiding power, 
watch over this Thy chosen servant, whom we dedi- 
eate to Thy service, that, using well the beginnings 
of Thy glory and heedfully observing Thy holy laws, 
he may be found worthy to attain to the fullness of 
the new birth. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Priest places the end of his stole upon the child’s 
shoulder, and says: 


Come into the temple of God, that thou mayest 
have part with Christ unto life eternal. 


THE FIRST ANOINTING 


The Priest now takes upon his right thumb a little 
of the otl of catechumens. At the first two crosses 
the Priest touches respectively the child’s breast or 
throat and the nape of his neck, making a small cross 
at each with the oil; he then makes two crosses, respec- 
tively before and behind the child, reaching to the en- 
tire length: of the body. 


P. In the name of Christ our Lord, I +-+ anoint thee 
with oil for thy safeguarding; may His holy Angel 
+ go before thee, and + follow after thee; may he 
be with thee in thy downsitting and thine uprising, 
and keep thee in all thy ways. 


246 BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 


THE BAPTISM 


While the child leans, or is held, over the font, the 
Priest pours some of the consecrated baptismal water 
over the head and forehead of the child thrice. At 
the same time he pronounces the words: 


N., I baptize thee in the‘Name of the + Father, 
and of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. Amen. 


If the Baptism be sub conditione the following is the 
formula: 


N., If thou art not already baptized, then do I 
baptize thee in the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. Amen. 


THE ANOINTING WITH CHRISM 


The Priest takes upon his thumb some of the sacred 
chrism, and, anointing the child on the top of the head 
in the form of a@ cross, says: 


With Christ’s holy chrism do I + anoint thee, that 
His strength may prevent thee in thy going out 
and thy coming in, and may guide thee into life 
everlasting. 


THE RECEPTION 


With his thumb, still moist with chrism, the Priest 
makes a cross upon the child’s brow; at the last clause 
he lays his hand upon the child’s head. 


P. I* [receive you into the fellowship of Christ’s 
holy Church and do] + sign you with the sign of the 
cross in token that hereafter you shall not be asham- 
ed to confess the faith of Christ our Lord, to ac- 
knowledge Him when He shall come, and manfully 
to fight under His banner against sin and Selfishness, 
and that you shall continue Christ’s faithful soldier 
and servant throughout the ages of ages. R. Amen. 





* These words in brackets are usually to be omitted 
when the person has already received baptism in some 
other Church or by lay ministration. 


BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 247 


EEE EEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 


A white silk handkerchief is brought, and the 
Priest, having blessed it, places it upon the shoulders 
of the child, saying: 

Receive from holy Church this white vesture as a 
pattern of the spotless purity and brightness of Him 
Whose service thou hast entered (to-day), and for a 
token of thy fellowship with Christ and His holy 
Angels, that thy life may be filled with His peace. 

Delivering a lighted candle to the child, the Priest 
Says: 

Take this burning light, enkindled from the fire 
of God’s holy Altar, for a sign of the ever-burn- 
ing light of thy spirit. God grant that hereafter 
His love shall so shine through thy heart that thou 
mayest continually enlighten the lives of thy fel- 
low-men. 


The Priest places his hand on the head of the child, 
Saying : 

N., go in peace, and may the Lord be with you. 
R. Amen. 


THE FINAL CHARGE 
The Priest then addresses the neophyte, saying: 


You who have come here to be baptized, seeing 
that now you are regenerate of water and the Holy 
Spirit, and grafted into the mystical body of Christ’s 
Church, remember that there lies upon you the duty 
of following God’s holy will and commandment, as it 
was spoken by our Lord Himself, when He said: 
‘““Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart and with all thy soul and with all thy mind and 
with all thy strength. This is the first and great 
commandment; and the second is like unto it: Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two 
commandments hang all the law and the prophets.’’ 

Also you shall further study the doctrine of the 
holy Catholic Church, into which you have been ad- 
mitted, and come in due course before the Bishop 
to be confirmed by him. 


248 BAPTISM OF ADULTS 
FORM TO BE USED FOR ADULTS 


THE INVOCATION 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. BR. Amen. 


The candidate comes forward and kneels. 
ate THE EXORCISM 


P. In the Name which is above every name, in the 
‘Power of the + Father, and of the + Son, and of 
the Holy + Ghost, be you so purified that you 
may be rightly prepared to receive this first Sacra- 
ment of Christ’s holy Church; (the Priest places his 
hand on the head of the candidate) for He who is the 
Lord of Love and Compassion hath deigned to call you 
to His holy grace and blessing, and to the font of Bap- 
tism. 

The Priest stretches out his right hand towards the 
candidate, and says: 


Do Thou, O Lord, with Thy ever-abiding power, 
watch over this Thy chosen servant, whom we dedi- 
cate to Thy service, that, using well the beginnings of 
Thy glory and heedfully observing Thy holy laws, 
he may be found worthy to attain to the fullness 
of the new birth. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


THE FIRST ANOINTING. 


The Priest takes upon his right thumb a little of the 
oil of catechumens. At the first two crosses the 
Priest touches respectively the candidate’s breast or 
throat and the nape of his neck, making a small cross at 
each with the oil; then he makes two crosses respec- 
tively before and behind the candidate, reaching to the 
entire length of the body. 

P. In the Name of Christ our Lord, I + + anoint 
thee with oil for thy safeguarding; may His holy An- 
gel + go before thee, and + follow after thee; may 
He be with thee in thy downsitting and thine upris- 
ing, and keep thee in all thy ways. 


BAPTISM OF ADULTS 249 
THE BAPTISM 


While the candidate leans over the font the Priest 
pours some of -the consecrated baptismal water thrice 
over his head and forehead, pronouncing these words: 


N., I baptize thee in the Name of the + Father, 
and of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. Amen. 





If the Baptism be sub conditione the following is the 
formula: 

N., if thou art not already baptized, then do I bap- 
tize thee in the Name of the + Father, and of the 
+ Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. Amen. 


THE ANOINTING WITH CHRISM 


The Priest takes wpon his thumb some of the sacred 
chrism, and, anointing the candidate on the top of the 
head in the form of a cross, says: 


With Christ’s holy chrism do I + anoint thee, 
that His strength may prevent thee in thy going 
out and thy coming in, and may guide thee into life 
everlasting. 


THE RECEPTION 


With his thumb, still moist with chrism, the Priest 
makes a cross upon the neophyte’s brow; at the last 
clause he lays his hand on the neophyte’s head. 


P. I* [receive you into the fellowship of Christ’s 
holy Church and do] + sign you with the sign of the 
cross in token that hereafter you shall not be asham- 
ed to confess the faith of Christ our Lord, to acknow- 
ledge Him when He shall come, and manfully to 
fight under His banner against sin and selfishness, 
and that you’ shall continue Christ’s faith- 
ful soldier and servant throughout the ages of ages. 
R. Amen. 


* These words in brackets are usually to be omittted 
when the person has already received baptism in some 
other Church or by lay ministration. 





250 BAPTISM OF ADULTS 





The giving of the white vesture and light may then 
follow (or not) at the option of the Priest. 


He places his hand on the head of the neophyte, say- 
ing: 

N., go in peace, and may the Lord be with thee. 
R. Amen. 


THE FINAL CHARGE 
The following charge is also optional: 


P. You who have come here to be baptized, seeing that 
now you are regenerate of water and the Holy Spirit, 
and grafted into the mystical body of Christ’s 
Church, remember that there lies upon you the duty 
of following God’s holy will and commandment, as 
it was spoken by our Lord Himself, when He said: 
‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with ail thy 
heart and with all thy soul and with all thy mind 
and with all thy strength. This is the first and 
great commandment; and the second is like unto it: 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these 
two commandments hang all the law and the pro- 
phets.’’ 


Also you shall further study the doctrine of the 
holy catholic Church, into which you have been ad- 
mitted, and come in due course before the Bishop to 
be confirmed by him. 


CONFIRMATION 


Confirmation is, literally, the making of the person firm 
or strong in the life in Christ begun at baptism. It 
has the two-fold effect of strengthening the soul, and 
giving it greater power to express itself through the 
body. 


The candidate pledges himself to endeavour to set 
aside the smaller life of personal interests and to work 
in the common interest. Having offered himself 
thereunto as a knight in Christ’s service, the sacra- 
mental act of Confirmation follows, and he is sealed 
once again with the sign of the holy cross, the emblem 
of the life of sacrifice and service. 





The candidates for Confirmation are seated in due 
order before the Bishop outside the chancel—thetr spon- 
sors also, if still alive and able to attend, being near at 
hand to present them at the proper time. 


THE INVOCATION 


Bishop. In the Name of the Father, yy and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


The Bishop is seated before the Altar. If desired, 
an address may here be delivered to the candidates, ea- 
plaining to them the nature of the Sacrament of Con- 
firmation, and of the responsibilities they take upon them- 
selves. The Bishop delivers the following charge: 


THE CHARGE 


My beloved children: on your entry into this mortal 
life you were brought into the house of God, and our 
holy Mother the Church met you with such help as 
then you could receive. Now that you can think 
and speak for yourselves, she offers you a further 
boon—the gift of God’s most Holy Spirit. This 
world in which we live is God’s world, and it is 
growing better and better day by day and year by 
year; but it is still far from perfect. There is still 
much of sin and selfishness; there are still many 


252 CONFIRMATION 


who know not God, neither understand His laws. 
So there is a constant struggle between good and 
evil, and, since you are members of Christ’s Church, 
you will be eager to take your stand upon God’s side 
and fight under the banner of our Lord. 





In the case of adults the foregoing is omitted and the 
following used instead: 


Since you are members of Christ’s Church, you will 
be eager to take your stand upon God’s side and 
fight under the banner of our Lord in the constant 
struggle between good and evil. 





In the case of both adults and children the charge 
continues as follows: 


In this Sacrament of Confirmation the Church gives 
you both the opportunity to enrol yourselves in 
Christ’s army and the strength to quit yourselves 
like men. : 


But if you enter His most holy service take heed 
that you are such soldiers as He would have you 
be. Strong must you be (as the lion),* yet gentle 
(as the lamb), ready ever to protect the weak, watch- 
ful ever to help where help is needed, to give re- 
verence to those to whom it is due, and to. show 
knightly courtesy to all. Never forgetting that God 
is Love, make it your constant care to shed love 
around you wherever you may g0; so will you fan 
into living flame the smouldering fires of love in the 
hearts of those in whom as yet the spark burns 
low. Remember that the Soldier of the Cross: must 
utterly uproot from his heart the giant weed of 
Selfishness, and must live not for himself but for the 
service of the world; for this commandment have 
we from Him, that he who loveth God love his 





*The words in parentheses are omitted in the case 
of adults. 


CONFIRMATION 253 


brother also. Remember that the power of God, 
which you are now about to receive from my hand, 
will ever work within you for righteousness, inclin- 
ing you unto a noble and upright life. Strive there- 
fore earnestly that your thoughts, your words, and 
your works shall be such as befit a child of Christ 
and a knight dedicated to His service. All this shall 
you zealously try to do for Christ’s sweet sake and 
in His most holy Name. 


THE INTERROGATIONS 


All rise, and the Bishop addresses the candidates as 
follows: 

Will you then strive to live in the spirit of love 
with all mankind, and manfully to fight against sin 
and selfishness ? 


Candidates. I will. 


Will you strive to show forth in your thoughts, 
your words and your works, the power of God which 
shall be given to you? 


c. I will. 


The candidates kneel; and the Bishop blesses them 
as follows: 


May the >» blessing of the Holy Ghost come 
down upon you, and may the power of the Most 
High preserve you in all your ways. R. Amen. 


The following hymn is sung, all kneeling: — 
VENI CREATOR 


Come, Thou Creator Spirit blest, 

And in our souls take up Thy rest; 

Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid, 
To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. 


Great Paraclete, to Thee we cry, 

O highest gift of God most high; 
O living Fount, O Fire, O Love, 
And sweet anointing from above! 


254 CONFIRMATION 





Thou in Thy sevenfold gifts art known; 
Thee, Finger of God’s Hand, we own, 
The promise of the Father, Thou 

Who dost the tongue with power endow. 


Kindle our senses from above, 

And make our hearts o’erflow with love; 
With patience firm and virtue high 

The weakness of our flesh supply. 


Far let us drive our tempting foe, 
And Thine abiding peace bestow; 

So shall we not, with Thee for guide, 
Turn from the path of life aside. 


O may Thy grace on us bestow 

The Father and the Son to know, 

And Thee, through endless times confessed 
Of both eternal Spirit blest. 


2 


All glory while the ages run 

Be to the Father and the Son, 
Who gave us life; the same to Thee 
O Holy Ghost, eternally. Amen, 


2 


THE CONFIRMATION 


Each candidate is severally led wp to the Bishop 
and instructed to kneel upon the cushion and to place his 
hands together, palm to palm, resting them upon the 
gremial which covers the Bishop’s knees. 


The candidate (prompted if necessary) says . 


Right Reverend Father, I offer myself to be a knight 
in Christ’s service. 


The Bishop, taking the candidate’s hands between 
his own and pressing them lightly, answers: 


In Christ’s most holy Name do I accept thee. 


The Bishop takes some chrism upon his right thumb, 
and placing his right hand upon the head of the can- 
didate, says: 


CONFIRMATION 255 


Receive the Holy Ghost for the sweet savour of a 
godly life; whereunto I do + sign thee with the 
Sign of the cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism 
of salvation. In the Name of the + Father, and 
of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


At the words, ‘‘I do sign thee,’’ the Bishop makes 
the sign of the cross with the chrism upon the fore- 
head of the neophyte. He makes the sign of the 
cross three times over the head of the neophyte as he 
recites the Names of the Holy Trinity. After a mo- 
mentary pause, the Bishop again lays his hand upon 
the head of the neophyte, saying: 

Therefore go thou forth, my brother, in the Name 
of the Lord, for in His strength thou canst do all 
things. 

The Bishop touches the neophyte lightly on the left 
cheek, saying: 

Peace be with thee. 


The neophyte rises, bows reverently to the Bishop, 
and is led back to his seat. 
When all have been confirmed, the following hymn is 
sung: 
HYMN 
O Master, I have promised 
To serve Thee to the end; 
Be Thou for ever near me, 
My Helper and my Friend; 
I shall not fear the battle 
If Thou art by my side, 
Nor wander from the pathway, 
If Thou wilt be my Guide. 


O let me feel Thee near me; 
The world is ever near; 

I see the sights that dazzle, 
The tempting sounds I hear; 

- My foes are ever near me, 

Around me and within; 

But in Thy holy Presence 
I shield my soul from sin. 


256 CONFIRMATION 


O let me hear Thee speaking 
In accents clear and still, 
Above the storms of passion, 
The murmurs of self-will; 
O speak to reassure me, 
To hasten or control; 
O speak sweet words of counsel, 
Thou Guardian of my soul. 


O Master, Thou hast promised 
To all who follow Thee 

That where Thou art in glory 
There shall Thy servants be; 

And, Master, I have promised 
To serve Thee to the end; 

May I find strength to follow, 
My Master and my Friend. 


O let me see Thy foot-marks, 
And in them plant mine own; 
My hope to follow duly 
Is in Thy strength alone. 
O guide me, call me, draw me, 
Uphold me to the end; 
And then in bliss receive me, 
My Master and my Friend. Amen, 


The Bishop, seating himself, addresses the newly- 
confirmed as follows: 


My brothers, now have you received the gift of 
the Holy Ghost; see ye to it that your bodies are 
ever pure and clean, as befits the temple of the most 
high God, and the channel of so great a power; and 
. understand that as you keep that channel open by a 
useful life spent in the service of others, so will His 
life that is within you shine forth with ever great-— 
er and greater glory. 


The Bishop rises and faces towards the Altar; the 
newly-confirmed kneel. 


Bishop. 44 Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 
Congregation. Who hath made heaven and earth. 


CONFIRMATION 


Sop ee ee See 
Blessed are the pure in heart. 
For they shall see God. 
Trust ye in the Lord for: ever. 
For He is our Rock of Ages. 
The Lord be with you. 
And with Thy spirit. 
Let us pray. 

The Bishop eatends his hands towards the newly- 
confirmed, and says: ; ' 

O Lord Christ, Who didst give the Holy Spirit to 
Thine apostles, and didst ordain that by them and 
their successors He should be given to the rest of the 


faithful, we render Thee hearty thanks for this 
Thine inestimable benefit now bestowed upon us. 


We offer unto Thee the lives which Thou to-day 
hast blessed, that they, whom Thou hast thus ac- 
cepted as soldiers in Thy Church militant here on 
earth, may so bear themselves as true and faithful 
knights in Thy service, that they may be found 
worthy hereafter to stand before Thee in the ranks 
of the Church triumphant, O Thou great King of 
Glory, to Whom be praise and adoration from men 
and from the Angel host. R. Amen. 


THE BENEDICTION 


The Bishop blesses the persons confirmed as fol- 
lows: : 


God the ++ Father, God the + Son, God the + Holy 
Ghost, bless, preserve and sanctify you; the Lord 
in His lovingkindness look down upon you and be 
gracious unto you; the Lord lift up the light of His 
Countenance upon you and give you His peace, now 
and for evermore. R. Amen. 

May the Holy Ones, Whose pupils you aspire to be- 
-come, show you the Light you seek, give you the 
strong aid of Their compassion and Their wisdom. 
There is a peace that passeth understanding; it abides 

I 


woawWawow 





— 258s CONFIRMATION 


in the hearts of those who live in the Eternal; there 
is a power that maketh all things new; it lives and 
moves in those who know the Self as One. May that 
peace brood over you, that power uplift you, till you 
stand where the One Initiator is invoked, till you 
see His > Star shine forth, R. Amen. 


If the sacrament of Confirmation is administered dur- 
ing the Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, or in con- 
nection with any other service, the second benediction 
given above shall not be used. It may be used only 
when the Confirmation is an entirely separate service. 


HOLY MATRIMONY 


Christ did not institute marriage, but the Sacrament 
blessing such marriage. This is intended to help the 
parties to live together in a state of love and mutual 
aid. When they have pledged their love and fidelity 
to each other in the presence of Christ, the Priest bless- 
es them in His Name. 


The ring, which is the symbol of their spiritual 
union, is also blessed. 





The Priest must be careful to acquaint himself with 
the legal requirements concerning marriage in his own 
particular country, and before performing any mar- 
riage to satisfy himself that it is free from impediment 
or wWlegality, especially when either of the contract- 
ing parties is of foreign birth or under age. 


THE MARRIAGE SERVICE 


The bridegroom and the bride (on his left), with their 
attendants, stand before the Altar rails. 


THE INVOCATION 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, }4 and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


Turning to the people, the Priest addresses them as 
follows: 


Dearly beloved, we are gathered together here in 
the sight of God, and in the face of this congre- 
gation, to join together this man and this woman in 
holy Matrimony, which is an honourable estate, not by 
any to be enterprised nor taken in hand unadvisedly, 
lightly or wantonly, but reverently, discreetly, advis- 
edly and soberly, in the sight of God. 


Into which estate these two persons come now to 
be joined. Therefore if any man can show any just 


12 


260 HOLY MATRIMONY _ 





cause why they may not lawfully be joined together, 
let him now speak or else hereafter for ever hold 
his peace. 


No impediment being alleged, the Priest questions 
the man and woman separately concerning their consent 
to marry. 


P. (to the man). Wilt thou, N., take N. here pres- 
ent for thy lawful wife according to the rite of our 
holy Mother the Church ? 


The bridegroom answers: I will. 


P. (to the woman). Wilt thou, N., take N. here 
present for thy lawful husband according to the rite 
of our holy Mother the Church ? 


The bride answers: I will. 


The bridegroom places the ring upon a salver held 
before him by an acolyte. The priest sprinkles the ring 
with holy water in the form of a cross, and then 
blesses it, saying: 


Bless -+ O Lord, and + hallow this ring, that she 
who shall wear it may ever Keep true faith unto her 
husband, and so, abiding in Thy peace and in con- 
formity to Thy holy will, may ever live with him 
in love unchanging. Through Christ our Lord. R. 
Amen. 


The ring remains upon the salver wntil required. 


P. Who giveth this woman to be married to this 
man ? 


_ The bride is then given away by her father or friend, 
who places her right hand in that of the Priest, who in 
turn bestows her upon the bridegroom with the words: 


Receive the precious gift of God. 
The bridegroom, taking her right hand in his, re- 
cewves her, to keep her in God’s faith and his own. 


Then shall the bridegroom plight her his troth in 
these words, repeated by him after the Priest: 


HOLY MATRIMONY 26s 





I, N., take thee, N., to be my wedded wife, to have 
and to hold, from this day forward, for better, for 
worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in 
health, to love, to cherish, and to honour, till death 
us here do part; and thereunto, in the presence of 
God and in the power and love of Christ our Lord 
and Master, I plight thee my troth. Amen. 

Then shall they loose hands, and the woman, taking 
the man’s right hand in her own, shall repeat after the 
Priest: 

I, N., take thee, N., to be my wedded husband, to 
have and to hold, from this day forward, for better, 
for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in 
health, to love, to cherish and to honour, till death 
us here do part; and thereunto, in the presence of 
God and in the power and love of Christ our Lord 
and Master, I plight thee my troth. Amen. 

The salwer bearing the ring is brought by an 
acolyte to the bridegroom, who repeats after the 
Priest: 

Bridegroom. (Placing the ring on the thumb of the 
bride’s left hand) In the Name of the Father, (then 
on the forefinger, saying:) and of the Son, (then 
on the next finger, saying:) and of the Holy Ghost, 
(lastly on the ring finger, as he seals his fidelity 
with the word:) Amen. Holding the ring in its place, 
he repeats after the Priest: 

With this ring I thee wed; my truest love I thee 
pledge; with my body I give thee reverence, and 
with all my strength I thee shield. Amen. 

If it should be thought well for the woman to give 
her intended husband a ring, it may be blessed after the 
other mutatis mutandis, and would now be placed upon 
his finger as a pledge of her love and fidelity. No 
words accompany this action, as in the true symbolism 
of the rite the woman fulfils her part rather by the re- 
cewing of the ring. 

The Priest joins their right hands, and after 
touching the forehead of the man and woman with 
holy water, says: 


262 HOLY MATRIMONY 


I join you together in marriage in the Name of 


the Father, + and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
Amen. 


Covering their joined hands with the end of his stole, 
he adds: : 


Those whom God hath joined together, let no man 
seek to put asunder. 


Then shall the Priest speak unto the people: 


Forasmuch as N. and N. have consented together 
in holy wedlock, and have witnessed the same before 
God and this company, and thereto have given and 
pledged their troth .either to other, and have declar- 
ed the same by giving and receiving of a ring and 
by joining of hands; I declare to you that they be 
man and wife together, in the Name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 





If a special Nuptial Eucharist is to be celebrated, 
the following portion in brackets, which forms part of 
such a Eucharistic Service, is here omitted. The newly- 
married pair kneel. 

[P. O Lord, bless Thy servant and Thy handmaid. | 

C. Who put their trust in Thee. 


P. Pour forth upon them of the fullness of Thy 
love. 


And lighten them with Thy heavenly grace. 
- Send them wisdom from Thy sanctuary. 

And do Thou dwell in their understanding. 

- Be unto them, O Lord, a tower of strength. 
And evermore defend them. : 

. The Lord be with you. 

- And with Thy spirit. 

. Let us pray. 

eternal God, Creator and .Preserver of all man- 


kind, Giver of all Spiritual grace, the Author of ever- 
lasting life, send Thy blessing upon these Thy ser- 


COHN QHAaHANHA 


HOLY MATRIMONY 263 


vants, this man and this woman, whom we -+ bless in 
Thy Name; that these persons may surely perform 
and keep the vow and covenant betwixt them made, 
and may so hold ‘their lives in the knowledge and 
love of Thee that they may dwell together in holy 
love and peace. Through Christ our Lord. R. 
Amen. | 





WEDDING HYMN. 


The people stand, but the newly-married pair kneel, 
while the hymn is sung. 


The voice that breathed o’er Eden 
That earliest wedding day, 

The primal marriage blessing— 
It hath not passed away. 


Still in the pure espousal 
Of Christian man and maid 
The Holy Three are with us, 
The threefold grace is said, 


\ 
For dower of blessed children, 
| For love and faith’s sweet sake, 
| For high mysterious union 
Which naught on earth may break. 


On Thee, O loving Father, | 
Thy humble servants wait; 

| Their future life together 

| To Thee they consecrate. 


O Christ, the King of glory, 
Whom Angel hosts obey, 

: Keep these Thy faithful soldiers 

In love and truth alway. 


Shine on them, Holy Spirit, 
And bless them as they kneel; 
Inspire them, guard them, guide them, 
Grant them Thy grace to feel, 





264 HOLY MATRIMONY 





O Trinity all-glorious, 
Whose love is like the sea, 
Pour forth Thy benediction 
On these who worship Thee. 


For them a new life opens; 
May it be Thine alone— 
A sacrifice, a service, 
Before Thine Altar-Throne. Amen, 


The Priest pronounces this blessing over the bride 
and bridegroom. 


Almighty God pour upon you the riches of His 
grace, sanctify and + bless you, that you may serve 
Him both in body and soul, and live together in 
holy love unto your lives’ end. R. Amen. 


If the Nuptial Eucharist is to be celebrated, it now 
follows. 


THE NUPTIAL EUCHARIST. 
CANTICLE 
Antiphon ‘ 
Now abideth faith, hope, love. 
But the greatest of these is love. 


1. Blessed are all they that love the Lord: and 
walk in His ways. 


2. For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: 
O well is thee and happy shalt thou be. 


3. They that put their trust in the Lord shall be 
even as the Mount Zion: which may not be memoweH, 
but standeth fast for ever. 


4. The hills stand about Jerusalem: even so 
standeth the Lord round about His people, from this 
time forth for evermore. 


Antiphon 
Now abideth faith, hope, love. 
But the greatest of these is love. 


HOLY MATRIMONY 265 


THE COLLECT 


O God, Who hast consecrated the state of marriage 
to such an excellent mystery that in it is signified the 
spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ and: His 
faithful people, grant unto these Thy servants that, 
casting aside all fear and selfishness and abiding 
in Thy holy love, they may so pass through things 
temporal that they may continually increase in the 
knowledge of things eternal, through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen, 


THE EPISTLE 


The Epistle is taken from the thirteenth chapter of 
the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the first verse. 


Though I speak with the tongues of men and of 
Angels, and have not love, I am become as sound- 
ing brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have 
the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, 
and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so 
that I could remove mountains, and have not love, 
I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods 
to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be 
burned, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing. 
Love suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; 
love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not 
behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not 
easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in 
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, 
believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth ali 
things. Love never faileth: but whether there be pro- 
phecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, 
they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, 
it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and 
we prophesy in part. But when that which is per- 
fect is come, then that which is in part shall be done 
away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I 
understood as a child, I thought as a child: but 
when I became a man, I put away childish things. 
For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then 


266 HOLY MATRIMONY 





face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I 
know even as also I am known. And now abideth 
faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of 
these is love. 

Here endeth the Epistle. 


THE GRADUAL 


1. The just shall shine and shall run to and fro: 
like sparks among the reeds. 


2. They shall judge nations, and rule over people: 
and their Lord shall reign for ever. 


38. They that trust in Him shall understand the 
truth: and they that are faithful in love shall rest 
in Him; for grace and peace is to His elect. 


4. He that loveth wisdom loveth life: and they 
that seek her early shall be filled with joy. 


5. He that holdeth her fast shall inherit glory: 
and wheresoever she entereth the Lord will bless. 


6. They that serve her shall minister to the Holy 
One: and them that love her the Lord doth love. 


7. She is more precious than rubies: and all the 
things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto 
her. 


8. Her ways are ways of pleasantness: and all her 
paths are peace. 


THE GOSPEL 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifteenth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the first 
verse. 


I am the true vine, and My Father is the hus- 
bandman. Every branch in Me that beareth not 
fruit He taketh away: and every branch that bear- 
eth fruit, He purgeth it, that it may bring forth more 
fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which 
I have spoken unto you. Abide in Me, and I in you. 
As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it 
abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide 


HOLY MATRIMONY 267 


a ee ee 
in Me. I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that 
abideth in Me, and I in him, the same pringeth forth 
much fruit: for without Me ye can do nothing. If 
aman abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch, 
and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them 
into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide 
in Me, and My words abide in you, ye shall ask what 
ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Herein 
is My Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; 
so shall ye be My disciples. As the Father hath lov- 
ed Me, so have I loved you; continue ye in My love. 
If ye keep My commandments, ye shall abide in My 
love; even as I have kept My Father’s command- 
ments, and abide in His love. These things have 
I spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in 
you, and that your joy might be full. 


BEFORE THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 
SAINTS 
The Priest stands at the Epistle corner of the Altar, 
turning towards the newly-married pair who kneel be- 
fore him, and the following Versicles and Responses 
and Prayers are sung: 
P. O Lord, bless Thy servant and Thy handmaid. 
C. Who put their trust in Thee. 
P. Pour forth upon them of the fullness of Thy 
love. 
. And lighten them with’ Thy heavenly grace. 
. Send them wisdom from Thy sanctuary. 
. And do Thou dwell in their understanding. 
. Be unto them, O Lord, a tower of strength. 
. And evermore defend them. 
. The Lord be with you. 
And with Thy spirit. 
. Let us pray. 
eternal God, Creator and Preserver of all man- 
kind, Giver of all spiritual grace, the Author of 


oven anHaHaA 


268 HOLY MATRIMONY 


everlasting life, send Thy blessing upon these Thy 
servants, this man and this woman, whom we -+ bless 
in Thy Name; that these persons may surely perform 
and keep the vow and covenant betwixt them made, 
and may so hold their lives in the knowledge and love 
of Thee that they may dwell together in holy love 
and peace. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


COMMUNIO 


The eye of the Lord is upon them that love Him: 
even upon them that rest on His lovingkindness. 


The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord: and 
the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. 


“For every good gift and every perfect gift is from 
above: and cometh down from the Father of Lights, 
in Whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turn- 
ing. 

POSTCOMMUNIO 


P. O Lord Christ, Thou Who art the Well of in- 
finite compassion, look with the tender eyes of Thy 
love upon Thy servant and Thy handmaiden; strength- 
en them that the light of Thy glory may ever 
burn brightly in their hearts, O Thou great King of 
Love, to Whom be praise and adoration from men 
and from the Angel host. R. Amen. 


If the father be dead or wnavoidably absent, and no 
friend can be found to take his place, the bride herself 
may place her right hand in that of the Priest, but the 
older form is to be preferred when it is possible. 


* 


CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION 


Absolution is a Sacrament by which persons may be 
restored to a state of spiritual health after the com- 
mission of sin. (See John xx. 22, 23.) The word is — 
derived from the Latin ab, from, and soivere, to loosen. 
Absolution must not be thought of as enabling a man 
to escape the consequences of his misdeeds. It is a 
spiritual process, a loosening from the bondage of sin, 
a process at-one-ment with the Higher Self, a restor- 
ation of that inner harmony of being which is dis- 
turbed by wrong-doing, so that the man can make 
a fresh effort towards righteousness, fortified by the 
uninterrupted flow of the Divine Power within him. 
That this Absolution may be fully effective, it is re- 
quisite that the candidate be anxious to rise above his 
imperfections of nature and to live the higher life. 
A man cannot escape the consequences of his mis- 
deeds, though he can neutralize them by sowing fresh 
causes of a righteous kind. ‘‘Be not deceived: God is 
not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall 
he also reap’? (Galatians vi. 7). : 


In the Liberal .Catholic Church auricular confession 
is entirely optional, and is not required as a preliminary 
to the reception of the Holy Communion. It is intend- 
ed primarily for those who may feel their conscience 
to be troubled with some weighty matter. Its fre- 
quent and systematic practice is not encouraged, since 
it is felt that under such conditions the detailed con- 
fession is apt to become a matter of routine and its 
spiritual value in the life of the individual thereby 
defeated. For all ordinary purposes the general con- 
fession in the Holy Eucharist should suffice. 


It is strictly forbidden to the Priest and the suppliant 
for Absolution respectively to ask and disclose the iden- 
tity of others implicated in any wrongdoing confessed. 
The suppliant comes to confess his own faults, not 
those of others. The Priest should be as sympathetic, 
natural and humane as possible with those who come to 
him to receive Absolution. 


270 CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION 








Children under seven are not subjects for confession, 
since it is the tradition of the Church that they are not 
capable of serious and responsible sin. Above that age 
and until they are responsible agents they may, in the 
Liberal Catholic Church, make auricular confession (save 
in emergency) only with the consent of one or other of 
the parents. 





The person desiring Absolution kneels at a prie-dieu 
in the church, beside which the Priest is seated. 


THE INVOCATION 


Suppliant (crossing himself). In the Name of 
the Father, }{{ and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost. Amen. Father, give me your blessing, for I 
have sinned. 


Priest. The Lord be in thy + heart and on thy 
+ lips, that thou mayest rightly confess thine of- 
fences. 

THE CONFESSION 


Suppliant. I confess before God Almighty, Father, 
Son, and Holy Spirit, and to you, Father, that I 
have sinned in thought, in desire, in word and deed. 
Especially I have . 


For these and all. my other offences which I can- 
not now remember, I am heartily sorry, firmly purpose 
amendment, most humbly ask remission of Almighty 
God, and of you, Father, absolution and the benefit of 
spiritual counsel and advice. 


The Priest hears the confession without interruption, 
unless that be necessary. He then gives such coun- 
sel as he may think well. In the Liberal Catholic 
usage he does not impose a penance, but may suggest 
that the suppliant should attend the Holy Eucharist, 
with the desire that the power which then comes to him 
shall be used against some particular fault or set of 
faults. This being done, he proceeds to the Absolu- 
tion. 


CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION 271 
THE ABSOLUTION 


P. Our Lord Christ, Who hath left power on 
earth to His Church to absolve all those that with 
hearty repentance and true faith turn unto Him, of 
His tender compassion forgive thee thine offences; 
and by:His authority committed unto me I+ ab- 
solve thee from all thy sins. In the Name of the 
Father, + and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
R. Amen. 


P. The King of Love and Fountain of all goodness 
restore unto thee the fellowship of the -Holy Spirit, 
and give thee grace to continue in the same, that thou 
mayest inherit the kingdom of heaven and be made 
like unto His own pure and glorious Image. R. Amen. 


A SERVICE OF HEALING 


The purpose of the Service of Healing is twofold; 
first, to bring spiritual upliftment to those who are 
in sore need thereof; second, to give some relief, when 
possible, to those whe are suffering from various phys- 
ical ills. ; 

At the outset, by means of the Asperges, the 
thought-atmosphere of the Church is purified and 
made ready for the coming of a healing Angel, who 
is immediately thereafter invoked. The Confiteor 
follows, and the attitude of those who join in those 
glowing sentences should be an earnest desire to rise 
above the imperfections of their nature, and to live 
the higher and nobler life. Such an attitude of in- 
tense earnestness calls to the deeps within us and 
arouses our spiritual powers to activity. The Priest 
then pronounces the Absolution. It must be remem- 
bered that this does not relieve a man of responsi. 
bility for the consequences of his wrong-doing, be- 
cause it is only by paying each debt which he con- 
tracts that be can learn the great lessons of life. 
Absolution dues make it easier, however, to do what 
is right after a mistake has been made, by clearing 
away the mental and emotional entanglements which 
blind the inner nature, and by straightening out dis- 
tortions in the etheric body. 

The people rise and sing a hymn which is intend- 
ed to incline their hearts to the Christ, and to en- 
able them to feel the nearness of His Presence and 
the wonder of His Love. The words of this hymn 
should be felt as well as sung by those who desire 
help. St. James’s instructions as to the anointing 
of the sick are then read, and the Veni Creator, which 
is the traditional call for the aid of God the Holy 
Ghost, is sung by His kneeling worshippers. While 
this is sung, for eyes that can see, the whole Church 
slowly fills with that glorious glow of fire which is 
the outward token of the power of the Presence of 
the Third Person of the Blessed Trinity; and in the 
strength of that Presence the Priest sends forth that 


A SERVICE OF HEALING. 273 





cleansing current of exorcism which is intended to 
clear away anything that might block the way of the 
healing force. 


This next step is to follow the apostolic custom 
of anointing the patient with consecrated oil, invok- 
ing the mighty Leader of the Hosts of the healing An- 
gels, the Archangel Raphael. The possibility of an- 
gelic assistance is unsuspected by the vast majority 
of people in this blind and materialistic age, but it 
is nevertheless a wonderful and beautiful fact which 
will be comprehended more and more clearly as the 
years roll on. Then the Priest lays his hands upon 
the patient’s head, and pours into him, with all the 
strength which God has given to him, the uplifting 
and curative force of the Lord Christ. He has been 
specially prepared by his ordination to be a channel 
for this force and for ‘the power of God the Holy 
Spirit, so in doing this he is but exercising one of 
the functions of his ministry. If a Bishop conducts 
the Service he has the additional opportunity of help- 
ing by the imposition of his crosier, the healing power 
of which has long been recognized. 


During the anointing and the laying on of hands 
the attitude of the patient should be that of love for 
our Lord Christ and confidence in His mighty power. 
The whole nature should be opened to the downpour- 
ing spiritual influence, even as a flower opens its 
chalice to the sun. The less the thoughts of a per- 
son are centred upon himself at this supreme moment, 
the more the depths of his nature are responsive to 
the compassionate Presence of the Christ, and the 
greater is the possibility of cure. 


The last great means of spiritual aid and physical 
healing is now given to the patient in the Holy Com- 
munion. No greater help both for body and soul 
can be offered than this, for with the reception of 
the Sacred Host the human body becomes for a few 
hours a veritable shrine, radiating the glowing love 
and power of the Christ. 


274 A SERVICE OF HEALING 


ieee, See ae ee ee 


It is not expected that those instantaneous cures 
which are commonly (though wrongly) called mirae- 
ulous will often oceur at these Services. They may 
and they do happen in certain cases; but we are not 
yet sufficiently conversant with the method of work- 
ing of these stupendous powers to be able to predict 
results. Many patients, especially chronic cases, feel 
considerable temporary improvement, but gradually 
relapse and slip back either partially or entirely. 
Such patients should try again. Where there is a 
slight amelioration, only temporary at the first at- 
tempt, a second may well carry it further; a third, a 
fourth, a fifth, a sixth may carry it much further 
still. Even the Christ Himself had to apply His 
treatment twice in the case of the man born blind. 

If a patient is not restored to health even after 
repeated trials it must not be thought that Christ 
cannot cure, that the Holy Spirit cannot cure; it 
should be remembered that the channels are human, 
frail and imperfect, and it may well be that, for any 
one of a dozen reasons, the divine force does not flow 
through this Priest or that in just the way that will 
cure a particular patient. The Priest will do his best 
to help; the patient will do his best to prepare him- 
self to be helped; what will come of it is in higher 
hands than ours—in the hands of Christ the Healer 
and the King. es 


A SERVICE OF HEALING 


THE INVOCATION 


The Priest wears a red stole. The people stand. The 
Priest says: 


In the Name of the Father, 4 and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 
ASPERGES 


Receiving the aspergill, he makes the sign of the 
cross over himself with it, saying: ; 


May the Lord purify me that I may worthily per- 
form His service. 


A SERVICE OF HEALING 975 





Sprinkling the Altar in the middle, then the chan- 
cel to his left and to his right, he continues: 


In the strength of the Lord do I repel all evil from 
this holy Altar and sanctuary: 


Then turning to the people and sprinkling them 
with the same triple motion: 


und from this House, wherein we worship Him; 
Turning back to the altar and resigning the aspergill: 


nd I pray our heavenly Father that He will 
send His healing Angel to minister unto these Thy 
servants here present, that they may be restored to 
lealth of mind and body. Through Christ our Lord. 
. Amen, 

CONFITEOR 
| All kneel, and say together: 
© Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
nade him to be an image of Thine own eternity; yet 
ften we forget the glory of our heritage, and wan- 
er from the path which leads to righteousness. But 
Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and our 
earts are ever restless till they find their rest in 
thee. Look with the eyes of Thy love upon our 
nanifold imperfections, and pardon all our short- 
omings, that we may be filled with the brightness 
f the everlasting light, and become the unspotted mir- 
v of Thy power and the image of Thy goodness. 
feos Christ our Lord. Amen. 


THE ABSOLUTION 


The Priest rises, goes to the Altar, and, turning to 

he people, who remain kneeling, says: 

| God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost 

less, -+ preserve and sanctify you; the Lord in His 
vingkindness look down upon you and be gracious 
to you; the Lord -X absolve you from all your 
ns and grant you the grace and comfort of the Holy 
irit. R. Amen. 


The people rise and sing: 


276 A SERVICE OF HEALING 


a ———  ————eeeEeEeEeEeeeee 


HYMN. 


Immortal Love, for ever full, 
For ever flowing free, 

For ever shared, for ever whole, 
A never-ebbing sea. 


Our outward lips confess the Name 
All other names above; 

Love only knoweth whence it came, 
And comprehendeth love. 


We need not climb the heavenly steeps 
To bring the Lord Christ down; 
Alike within the lowest deeps 
Is He, of heaven the Crown. 


But warm, sweet, tender, even yet 
A present help is He; 

And faith has still its Olivet, 
And love its Galilee. 


The healing of His seamless dress 
Is by our beds of pain; 

We touch Him in life’s throng and press, 
And we are whole again. 


Through Him the first fond prayers are said 
Our lips of childhood frame; 
The last low whispers o’er our dead 
Are uttered in His Name. 
Alone, O Love ineffable, 
Thy holy Name is given; 
A thousand saints Thy glories tell 
Who in that Name have striven. 


Lord Christ, of Love and Joy the Sun, 
Undying praise to Thee, 
With Father and with Spirit One, 
Through all eternity. Amen. 
The people are seated. 
READING FROM SCRIPTURE 
P. Hear the words of the Apostle James: 


Is any sick among you? let him call for the | 
elders of the Church; and let them pray over him, 








A SERVICE OF HEALING 277 





anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord. 
And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the 
Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed 
sins, they shall be forgiven him. Pray for one an- 
other that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent 
prayer of a righteous man availeth much. 


All kneel while the following appeal is sung: 
VENI CREATOR 


Come, Thou Creator Spirit blest, 

And in our souls take up Thy rest; 

Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid, 
To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. 


Great Paraclete, to Thee we cry, 
O highest gift of God most high; 
O living Fount, O Fire, O Love, 
And sweet anointing from above. 


Thou in Thy sevenfold gifts art known; 
Thee, Finger of God’s Hand, we own, 
The promise of the Father, Thou 

Who dost the tongue with power endow. 


Kindle our senses from above, 

And make our hearts o’erflow with love; 
With patience firm and virtue high 

The weakness of our flesh supply. 


Far let us drive our tempting foe, 
And Thine abiding peace bestow; 
So shall we not, with Thee for guide, 
Turn from the path of life aside. 


O may Thy grace on us bestow 

The Father and the Son to know, 

And Thee, through endless times confessed, 
Of both eternal Spirit blest. 


All glory while the ages run 

Be to the Father and the Son, 

Who gave us life; the same to Thee, 
O Holy Ghost, eternally. Amen. 


278 A SERVICE OF HEALING 





THE UNCTION 


The Priest descends from the Altar and goes to the 
place in the chancel at which he is to administer 
Holy Unction. 


P. Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 


O Lord, Who hast given unto man bodily health 
“and vigour wherewith to serve Thee, we pray Thee to 
free Thy servants from their sickness so far as may 
be expedient for them, and by the might of Thy ++ 
blessing to restore unto them full health, both out- 
wardly in their bodies and inwardly in their souls. 
Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The people are seated. Those who desire to be 
anointed are brought to the Priest one by one, and kneel 
upon a cushion. The Priest now says over each one: 


In the Name which is above every name, in the 
power of the + Father, and of the + Son, and of 
the Holy + Ghost, I exorcize all influences of evil, 
that thou mayest be rightly purified to receive this 
Sacrament of Holy Unction. 


Taking upon his thumb some of the holy oil for the 
sick, the Priest anoints the person in the form of a 
cross upon the forehead, saying: 


In the Name of our Lord Christ, and invoking the 
help of the holy Archangel Raphael, I + anoint thee 


with oil, that thou mayest gain refreshment, both of 
soul and body. } 


The Priest proceeds to anoint, in the same manner 
as before, but im silence, the centre at the top of the 
head, the front of the throat and the nape of the neck. 
He then places both hands upon the head of the person 
with the definite intent to heal, saying: 


Christ, the Son of God, look down upon thine afflic- 


A SERVICE OF HEALING 279 





tion, and heal thee of all thine infirmities. May the 
Light of His Love enfold thee forever.* 

If a Bishop is conducting the service he may at this 
point touch the person with his crosier. 

When all desiring the sacrament of Holy Unction 
have been anointed, the Priest cleanses his hands and, 
turning to the people, says: 

As with this visible oil your bodies are outwardly 
anointed, so may Almighty God, our heavenly Father, 
grant of His infinite goodness that your souls may 
be anointed inwardly with the Holy Ghost, Who 
is the Spirit of strength, relief and gladness. And 
may He so replenish you with the spirit of His Wis- 
dom and strengthen you with His mighty power, that 
you may persevere in the way of holiness and ever 
serve Him joyfully in the course that He hath ap- 
pointed for you. Through Christ our Lord. R. 
Amen, 

[The Priest turns to the Altar and says: 

O God, Who in the wonderful sacrament of the Al- 
tar has left us a living memorial of Thine eternal 
Sacrifice; grant us, we beseech Thee, so to venerate 
the sacred mystery of Thy Body and Blood that we 
may ever perceive within ourselves the power of Thine 
indwelling life, and thus, by the glad pouring out 
of our lives in sacrifice, may know ourselves to be one 
with Thee, and through Thee with all that lives; who 
livest and reignest with the Father in the unity of 
the Holy Spirit, God, throughout all ages of ages. R. 
Amen. | 

Those who have been anointed kneel at the Chancel 
rail, and the Priest administers Holy Communion to 
them, saying to each: 

The Body of our Lord Christ keep thee unto life 
eternal. 

When all have partaken, the people rise and sing: 





*The following alternative formula may be employ- 
ed if preferred: ‘‘Christ the Son of God pour down 
His healing power upon thee, and enfold thee in the 
Light of His Love.’’ 


280 A SERVICE OF HEALING 
Co ee 


HYMN. 


Great Master, Whose Name is the Healer, 
O enter this poor heart of mine 
And make it for ever Thy dwelling, 
A home wherein all things are Thine. 
O Son of the Father eternal, 
Be with me, a Friend and a Guest; 
Abide in Thine own human mansion, 
Its Joy and its Hope and its Rest. 


Leave in me no darkness unlighted, 
Unwarmed by Thy Truth’s holy fire; 

No thought which Thou canst not inhabit 
No purpose Thou dost not inspire. 

Shut in into silence, my midnight 
Is dawn if Thy Presence I see; 

When I open my doors to Thy coming, 
lio! all things are radiant with Thee. 


O what is so sweet as to love Thee 
And live with Thee always in sight ? 
Lord, enter this house of my being, 
And fill every room with Thy Light. 
All honour and praise to the Father, 
All honour and praise to the Son, 
All honour and praise to the Spirit, 
The Three Who forever are One. Amen. 


P. -Let us pray. 

We who have been refreshed with Thy heavenly 
gifts do pray Thee, O Lord, that Thy grace may be 
so grafted inwardly in our hearts that it may con- 
tinually be made manifest in our lives, through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. . 


THE BENEDICTION. 


The Priest turns to the people. 

Unto God’s gracious love and protection we commit 
you; the Lord 4 bless you and keep you; the Lord 
make His Face to shine upon you and be gracious 
unto you; the Lord lift up the light of His Counten- 
ance upon you and give you His peace, now and for 
evermore. R. Amen. 3 


A SERVICH OF HEALING 281 





If there be two Priests present the work may be 
divided between them. The patients may be ar- 
ranged along the Chancel rail, a considerable space 
being left between them, and the Priests may pass 
from one to another, precisely as at the administra- 
tion of the Holy Eucharist. The first Priest may 
pronounce the exorcism, anoint the patient, and lay 
his hands upon him; the second Priest may repeat 
the laying on of hands, and may then administer the 
Holy Communion before the patient leaves his place 
at the rail. In that case the Communion will pre- 
cede the prayer, ‘‘As with this visible oil.’’ If 
there be more than two Priests, the others may come 
between the first and second abovementioned, each 
of them simply laying his hands on each patient, and 
using only the formula: ‘‘Christ the Son of God, 
ete.” 

s 
_ If it be desired to hold a special intercessory Ser- 
vice for sick persons who cannot be present, the Holy 
Eucharist may be offered for that intention, the Col- 
lect, Epistle and Gospel prescribed on pages 177-179 
being used, and the names of the sick being mentioned 
‘in the usual place. 

_ The Benediction of the Most Holy Sacrament may 
also be used as an intercessory Service for the sick, 
in which case the Litany should be sung with spec- 
ial intention for the sick, or it may be replaced 
by another. 

_ After the prayer following the TYantwm Ergo the 
prayer ‘‘For the Sick,’’ on page 278, should be used, 
and the names to be commemorated read aloud. If 
there be many names, the Priests may read them 
aloud before the prayer, saying: ‘‘The prayers of the 
congregation are desired for ——,’’ 


| 
| 





HOLY UNCTION AND 
COMMUNION OF THE SICK 





The purposes of the Sacrament of Holy Unction are: 
(a) to aid in the restoration of bodily health, (b) to 
prepare the man for death, (¢) to which may be added 
remission of sin, since it also involves a form of Absolu- 
tion. Notwithstanding the trend of custom in the 
Latin Church, which has been to limit the administra- 
tion of this rite to those in grave danger of death, 
it is desirable that the rite should be more generally 
employed as an aid to recovery from any serious sick- 
ness. For this reason it is among us called ‘‘ Holy 
Unction,’’ rather than ‘‘Extreme Unction,’’ though the 
latter name is sometimes said to originate from the 
idea that it is the last of the unctions given to the 
ordinary Christian, those of Baptism and Confirma- 
tion preceding it. 


Holy Unction is not to be regarded as having in 
ordinary circumstances any quasi-miraculous effect. It 
is intended simply to aid the normal processes of nature 
by freeing the body from lower influences and opening 
it to spiritual influence. 


It is desirable that the person to be anointed should 
receive Holy Communion, if he be capable of doing so. 
In this Liturgy it has been thought well that this 
should take place after the Anointing—for which there 
is abundance of precedent in early times—and that 
the Confession and Absolution should be incorporated 
in the rite of Holy Unction. 


If Communion of the Sick is to be administered 
apart from Holy Unction, the form for the Adminis- 
tration of Holy Communion with the reserved Sacra- 
ment on page 205 should be used, unless a complete 
Celebration is to take place in the house. 








HOLY UNCTION 283 


If convenient, a table should be provided, covered 
with a linen cloth and bearing upon it a cross and two 
lighted candles. The Priest wears a violet stole. 


THE INVOCATION 


P. In the Name of the Father, 4 and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen, 


The Priest now touches the forehead of the patient 
with holy water and sprinkles his surroundings. 


*[P. Hear the words of the Apostle James: 


Is any sick among you? Let him call for the 
elders of the Church; and let them pray over him, 
anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord. 
And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the 
Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed 
sins, they shall be forgiven him. Pray for one an- 
other, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent 
prayer of a righteous man availeth much, | 


CONFITEOR 


The sick man should now make confession of his of- 
fences, reciting the Confiteor, or if he feel his conscience 
sufficiently troubled with any weighty matter, making 
@ special confession (but without the usual form and 
prelimmaries). If the patient be very weak, the Con- 
fiteor may be said on his behalf by the Priest or another, 
or it suffices that he make a mental act of aspiration. 


O Lord, Thou hast created man to be immortal, and 
made him to be an image of Thine own eternity; 
yet often we forget the glory of our heritage, and 
wander from the path which leads to righteousness. 
But Thou, O Lord, hast made us for Thyself, and 
our hearts are ever restless till they find their rest 
in Thee. Look with the eyes of Thy love upon my mani- 
fold imperfections, and pardon all my shortcomings; 
that I may be filled with the brightness of the ever- 





* The portion in brackets may be omitted. 


284 HOLY UNCTION 


lasting light, and become the unspotted mirror of 
Thy power, and the image of Thy goodness. Through 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


THE-UNCTION* 


Taking upon his thumb some of the holy oil for the 
sick, the Priest anoints in the form of a@ cross the or- 
gans of sense, using the words hereinunder specified: 


Upon the closed eyelids: 

P. By this holy + unction and of His most ten- 
der love, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou 
hast committed through seeing. R. Amen. 


Upon the ears: 


P. By this holy + unction and of His most ten- 
der love, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou 
hast committed through hearing. R. Amen. 


Upon the nostrils: 


P. By this holy + unction and of His most ten- 
der love, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou 
hast committed through smelling. R. Amen. 


Upon the closed lips: 


P. By this holy + unction and of His most ten- 
der love, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou 
hast committed through tasting. R. Amen. 


Upon thie inside of the palms of the hands (but out- 
side in thé case of Priests): 


The feet and reins (i.e., the small of the back) may 
also at this time be anointed, but this is optional. 





* Where there is no reason to think that the illness is 
likely to be fatal, this form of unction is preferably 
omitted; the Priest then proceeds immediately to the Ab- 
solution, and uses the alternative unction following there- 
after in brackets. ‘ : 


HOLY UNCTION 285 


P. By this holy + unction and of His most ten- 
der love, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou 
hast committed through touch. R. Amen. 


In cases of extremity, or at the option of the Priest, 
the forehead only need be anointed, with these words: 

P. By this holy + unction and of His most ten- 
der love, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou 
hast committed through thy thoughts and desires, 
and the senses of thy body. BR. Amen. 


THE ABSOLUTION 


P. Our Lord Christ, Who hath left power 
on earth to His Church to absolve all those that with 
hearty repentance and true faith turn unto Him, of 
His tender compassion forgive thee thine of- 
fences; and by His authority committed unto me I 
+ absolve thee from all thy sins. In the Name of 
the Father, + and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
Amen, 


P. The King of Love and Fountain of all good- 
ness restore unto thee the fellowship of the Holy 
Spirit, and give thee grace to continue in the same, 
that thou mayest inherit the kingdom of heaven and 
be made like unto His own pure and glorious Image. 
R. Amen. 





AN ALTERNATIVE UNCTION 
To be used when the previous unction is omitted. - 
[P. Let us pray. 


O Lord, Who hast given unto man bodily health 
and vigour: wherewith to serve Thee, we pray Thee 
to free Thy servant from his sickness so far as may 
be expedient for him, and by the might of Thy + 
blessing to restore unto him full health, both out- 
wardly in his body and inwardly in his soul. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


286 HOLY UNCTION 





The Priest now anoints the patient with the oil for 
the sick upon the forehead, saying: ; 


In the Name of Christ, and invoking the holy Arch- 
angel Raphael, I + anoint thee with oil, that thou 
mayest gain refreshment, both of soul and body. R. 
Amen. 





Whichever form of unction has been used, the Priest 
now proceeds to anoint, in the same manner as before 
but im silence, the seven centres of the body, to wit: 
the sacral plexus (at the base of the spine), the spleen 
(from the back, near the tenth rib on the left side of 
the body), the solar plexus (above the navel), the heart, 
the pharyngeal plexus (at the front of the throat), the 
centre between the eyebrows (unless this has already 
been anointed), and the centre at the top of the head. 


Of these it is sufficient to anoint the last-four or five, 
more especially if the patient’s infirmity be great. 


Lhe Priest then says the following prayer, omitting 
the portion in brackets if it be inappropriate: 


As with this visible oil thy body is outwardly an-. 
ointed, so our heavenly Father, Almighty God, grant) 
of His infinite goodness that thy soul inwardly may! 
be anointed with the Holy Ghost, Who is the Spirit. 
of strength, relief and gladness. And [howsoever 
His goodness shall dispose of thee, whether this. 
world still detain thee in the flesh or the future re- 
ceive thee out of the body,| may He so replenish 
thee with the spirit of His wisdom and strengthen 
thee with His mighty power, that thou mayest per-| 
severe in the way of holiness and ever serve Him | 
joyfully in the course He hath appointed for thee. 
Through Christ our Lord. BR. Amen. 4 


THE BENEDICTION 


P. Christ, the Son of God, look down upon thine| 
affliction, and heal thee of all thine infirmities. May 
the Light of His Love enfold thee for ever. 





HOLY UNCTION 287 


If Holy Communion is to be given, the following 
blessing is omitted. ; 
_ P. Unto God’s gracious love and protection we com- 
mit thee; the Lord HX bless thee and keep thee; 
the Lord make His Face to shine upon thee and 
be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up the light of 
tis Countenance upon thee and give thee His peace, 
now and for evermore. RB. Amen. 





The Priest, wearing a _ white Stole, administers 
Loly Communion, if the sick man be capable of receiving 
Up The form for the administration of Holy Com- 
union with the reserved Sacrament. is used, the Con- 
too and Absolution being omitted. In cases of great 
eakness the words of administration alone will suffice. 





PROCEDURE “IN EXTREMIS.”’’ 


THE ABSOLUTION 


|The Priest should exhort the dying man to make a 
homentary act of contrition and then to turn with love 
nd devotion to his Master. The Priest immediately 
onounces the Absolution, using, if necessary, the fol- 
wing shortened form: 


I + absolve thee from all thy sins, in the Name 
- the Father, + and of the Son, and of the Holy 
host. R. Amen, 

THE UNCTION 


\Holy Unction may be administered, the Priest 
ointing the forehead, as he says: 


‘By this holy + unction and of His most tender 
e, the Lord pardon thee whatever faults thou hast 

mmitted through thy thoughts and desires, and the 
es of thy body. R. Amen, 


VIATICUM 


The Viaticwm is then given, unless there. be danger of 
e body rejecting, or being unable to swallow, the Sac- 










288 HOLY UNCTION 


red Host. The Host may be placed in a spoon and giv- 
en with a little wine or water. 


P. Brother (or Sister), receive the Viaticum of the 
most holy Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and may 
the peace of the Lord go with thee. R. - Amen, 


THE BENEDICTION 


P. Unto God’s gracious love and protection we 
commit thee; the Lord + bless thee and keep thee; 
the Lord make His Face to shine upon thee and be 
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up the light of His 
Countenance upon thee and give thee His peace, now 
and for evermore. R. Amen. 


If death takes place, the Priest may at once proceed 
to the Absolution, as set forth in the Order of the Burial 
of the Dead. 


} 





THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD 





The funeral rites of the Church may be grouped into 
two divisions; the first including those offices, foremost 
in importance, whose purpose it is to surround the liber- 
ated soul with peace and spiritual power. Of these the 
offering of the Holy Sacrifice for the repose of the soul 
is the most important and efficacious. The other and 
less important part of the rite consists in the hallowing 
of the grave and the consigning into it of the ashes or 
the cast-off body. To this must be added the work of 
giving comfort and assurance to the relatives and friends. 


This work of giving help and peace to the departed 
person is inevitably hindered if we surround him with 
feelings of depression and unhappiness. Every effort 
should therefore be made to put aside our own very: 
natural sense of sorrow and loss, and to think rather 
of the happiness and peace of the departed soul. In 
proportion as we can accomplish this, do we also gain 
comfort and strength for ourselves. 





The Priest should be asked to commemorate the de- 
ceased person, as soon after the death as possible, at one 
of his regular Celebrations. It is strongly recommend- 
ed that wherever possible the physical body of the de- 
ceased person shall be cremated, that is, disintegrated 


rapidly by fire rather than by process of slow decay. 


If there is to be a special Requiem Eucharist the body 


should if possible be taken to the church where that 


Eucharist is offered. 


After the death, tt is well that the body should be 
sprinkled by the relatives with holy water, either bless- 
ed specially by a Priest or obtained from the holy water 
stoup of a neighbouring church. The coffin should simi- 
larly be sprinkled before. the funeral procession leaves 
the house. The Absolution hereafter printed should be 


K © 


290 BURIAL OF THE DEAD 





performed as soon after the death as is convenient, un- 
less the deceased person received Absolution shortly be- 
fore death. It may be repeated at the burial service. 
In the case of a child of tender years the Absolution 
is omitted. y 





As the. burial customs vary in different countries 
and places, the clergy must use their discretion in re- 
arranging the several portions of the ceremony. Hymns 
may be introduced at suitable places, also addresses and 
readings from various sources. If the entire ceremony 
be found too long, those portions may be omitted to 
which an asterisk is prefixed. 


According to the arrangements made, the portion of 
this ceremony preceding the Burial itself will take 
place in the cemetery out-of-doors, in the cemetery chapel, 
in a funeral parlour, in a private house, or in the church. 

The Priest may etther accompany the funeral proces- 
sion or meet tt at the cemetery. 





As the body is carried through the cemetery or the 
church, some of the following passages are read by the 
Priest or chanted by the choir: 


I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord: 
he that believeth in Me, though he were dead yet 
shall he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth 
in Me shall never die. 


*Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth: 
where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves 
break through and steal. 


But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven: 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves do not break through nor steal. 


For where your treasure is: there will your heart 
be also. 





*I know that my Redeemer liveth: Whom I shall 
see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold. : 


e 


“BURIAL OF THE DEAD 291 


_ *Be not deceived; God is ‘not mocked: for what- 
soever a'man soweth, that shall he also reap. 


For he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the fiesh 
reap corruption: but he that soweth to the Spirit, 
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. 


_ And let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due 
season we shall reap, if we faint not. 


As we have therefore opportunity: let us do good 
unto all men. 

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of 
God: and there shall no torment touch them. 


In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, 
and their departure is taken for misery, and their 
going from us to be utter destruction: but they are 
in peace. 


For God created man to be immortal: and made 
him to be an image of His own eternity. 


Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


THE INVOCATION } 
When the Priest has arrived at the chancel or grave, 
and the above sentences are finished, he says: 


In the Name of the Father, > and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 


THEH FIRST CHARGE 


He turns to the people and speaks as follows: 
Brethren, we are met together here to-day to cele- 
brate the passing into a higher life of our dear 
brother N. It is but natural that we who have 
known and loved him should regret his departure 
K2 


292 BURIAL OF THE DEAD 


from amongst us; yet on this occasion it is our duty 
to think not of ourselves, but of him. Therefore. 
must we strenuously endeavour to lay aside the 
thought of our personal loss, and dwell only upon 
his great and most glorious gain. 


To this end I will call upon you to join with me 
in the recitation (or singing) of the Ze Deum (or- 
part of the twenty-third psalm). 


TH DEUM LAUDAMUS 
Antiphon _ 


The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away, 
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. 


1. We praise Thee, O God: we acknowledge Thee to 
be the Lord. 


2. All the earth doth worship Thee: the Father ever-: 
lasting. | 

3. To Thee all Angels sing aloud: the heavens and 
all the powers therein. 


4. To Thee Cherubim and Seraphim: continually do 
cry. 

5. Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Hosts. 

6, Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of Thy 
glory. 

7. The glorious company of the apostles: praise Thee. 


8. The goodly fellowship of the prophets: praise 
Thee. 


9. The noble army of martyrs: praise Thee. 


10. The holy Church throughout all the world: doth’ 
acknowledge Thee. 


11. The Father: of an infinite majesty. 
12, Thine honourable, true: and only Son. 
13. Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter. 
14. Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ. 


BURIAL OF THE DEAD 293 


15. Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father. 

16. Thou sittest at the right hand of God: in the 
glory of the Father. 

17. Thou art Alpha and Omega: Thou first and last 
of all. 

18. Offspring and root of David: Thou bright and 
morning Star, 

19. Day by day: we magnify Thee. 

20. And we worship Thy Name: ever world without 
end. 

21. Thou Who from Both dost come: O God the Holy 
Ghost. 

22. Thee, too, O Paraclete: we worship and adore. 

23. Thou art the Fount of life: the living Fire of 
love. 

24, Three in One: most holy Lord and God, 

25. Co-equal, co-eternal: before beginning and with- 
out an end. 

26. We Thy servants live in Thee; and all we have 
is Thine. 

27. We bless Thee, we magnify Thee: most joyous- 
ly we serve Thee. 

28. O mighty, glorious Trinity: let all the people 
praise Thee. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. : 
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 

be: world without end. Amen, 


Antiphon 


The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away. 
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. 








[Part of Psalm 23 may be sung instead of the Te 
Deum, if preferred. | 
PSALM 23. 
Antiphon. 
The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away. 
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. 


204 BURIAL OF THE DEAD 


1. The Lord is my Shepherd: therefore can I lack 
nothing. 

2. He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me 
forth beside the waters of comfort. 

3. He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in 
the paths of righteousness, for His Name’s sake, 

4, Yea, though I walk through the valley of the 
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for Thou art with 
me; Thy rod and Thy staff comfort me. 


Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the 
Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 


The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away. 
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.] 





THE ABSOLUTION 


During the following passages the Priest encompass: | 
es the body and sprinkles it with holy water thrice on 
either side, after which he again encompasses it and 
censes tt thrice on either side. If the body be not 
present, these ceremonies are omitted, but the words,’ 
nevertheless, are said. The Absolution is omitted in the’ 
case of young children. 







P. Rest in the eternal grant unto him, O Lord. 
C. And let light perpetual shine upon him. 


P. Come forth to meet him, ye Angels of th 
Lord. 


C.. Receive him into your fellowship, O ye saint 
of God. 


May the choirs of Angels receive him. 

And guide him into eternal peace. 

Rest in the eternal grant unto him, O Lord. 
And let light perpetual shine upon him. 


ew Od 


BURIAL OF THE DEAD 295 


P. O God, in Whose unspeakable love the souls 
of the departed find rest and peace, in Thy Name 
we -+ absolve from every bond of sin Thy servant 
‘who has cast off this garment of fleshh May Thy 
holy Angels bear him in their tender care, that he 
may enter the brightness of the everlasting light 
and find his peace in Thee. Through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen. 








THE COLLECTS 


The following Collects are recited, unless a spec- 
ial Requiem Eucharist is to be celebrated. In that event, 
the Eucharist begins, and the Collects will be said in 
the usual place therein. In the case of children, the words 
“*this Thy child’’ are used instead of ‘‘this Thy ser- 
vant.’? 

P. The Lord be with you. 

C. And with thy spirit. 


P. Let us pray. 

Almighty God, Who hast dominion over both the 
living and the dead, and dost hold all Thy creation 
in the everlasting arms of Thy love, we pray Thee 
for the peace and repose of Thy servant, that he, 
being dead unto this world, yet ever living unto 
Thee, may find in Thy continued and unceasing ser- 
vice the perfect consummation of happiness and 
peace. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen, 


P. Likewise, O Lord, we pray Thee for those who 
love Thy servant, those whom Thou hast called to 
sacrifice the solace of his earthly presence; do Thou, 
O Lord, comfort them with the balm of Thy loving- 
kindness, that, strengthened by Thee and resting 
upon the surety of Thy wisdom, they may put aside 
their thoughts of sorrow and grief, and pour out upon 
him only such thoughts of love as may help him in 
the higher life of service to which Thou hast now 
called him. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Epistle, Gospel and Communio from the Requiem 
Eucharist may follow here if desired. 





296 BURIAL OF THE DEAD 
THE BURIAL 


The procession bearing the coffin goes to the 
grave. Before the coffin is lowered the grave is sprinkled 
with holy water and censed. 





[In case of cremation, the wrn containing the ashes is 
sometimes buried in a grave, sometimes deposited in a 
niche. In the former case the same formalities are ob- 
served as with a coffin. In the latter, the niche 1s 
treated as the grave, save that, of course, earth is pot 
thrown therein. | 


The following prayer is said by the Priest: 


O God, Who in Thy providence hast appointed a 
wondrous ministry of Angels, we pray Thee to + 
hallow this grave, and send down Thy holy Angel 
from heaven to -+ bless and sanctify it. Througt 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


THE SECOND CHARGE 
The coffin is then lowered, as the Priest says: 


Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God o: 
His great love to take unto Himself our dear brothe 
hence departed, we therefore commit this his cast-of 
body to the ground, earth to earth (here some earti 
is cast upon the coffin by the Priest or someon 
standing by), ashes to ashes, dust to dust, that in 
that more glorious spiritual body which now jh 
weareth, he may be free from earthly chains t 
serve God as he ought. For I say unto you: Bles 
ed are the dead which die in the Lord; for the soul 
of the righteous are in the hand of God, and ther. 
Shuil no torment touch them. In the sight of th 
unwise they seem to die, and their departure i 
taken for misery, and their going from us to b 
utter destruction, but they are in peace. For Go 
created man to be immortal, and made him to be a 
image of His own eternity. The Lord sitteth abov 
the waterfloods; the Lord remaineth a King fo 
ever. The universe is His temple; wisdom, streng 






















BURIAL OF THE DEAD 297 


and beauty are about His throne as Pillars of His 
works; for His wisdom is infinite, His Strength is om- 
nipotent, and His beauty shines through the whole 
universe in order and symmetry. The heavens He 
| has Stretched forth as a canopy; the earth He has 
| planted as His footstool; He crowns His temple with 
‘stars as with a diadem, and from His hands flow 
Jall power and glory. The sun and the moon are 
imessengers of His will, and all His law is concord. 
If we ascend up into heaven, He is there; if we go 
jdown into hell, He is there also. If we take the 
jwings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost 
jparts of the sea, even there also His hand shall 
in us, and His right hand shall hold us. In His 


4 





almighty care we rest in perfect peace, and equally 
in His care rests this our loved one, whom He has 
ideigned to draw nearer to the vision of His eternal 
beauty. 


Ever praising Him therefore, in firm but humble 
«confidence we call upon Him and say: 


O Father of Light, in Whom is no darkness at all, 
e pray Thee to fill our hearts with calm and 
peace, and to open within us the eyes of the soul, 
hat we may see by faith the radiance and the glory 
hat Thou art pouring upon us Thy servants. For 
hou ever givest us far more than we can ask or 
hink, and it is only through our feebleness and 
faithlessness that we ever need crave anything from 
[Thine omnipotence. But Thou knowest well the 
weakness of the human heart, and in Thy limitless 
ove Thou wilt make allowance for our human love 
hen we beseech Thee to grant eternal rest unto 
ie our dear brother, and that light perpetual may 
Whine upon him. We thank thee that in Thy loving 
rovidence Thou hast drawn him from the unreal 
wards the Real, from the darkness of earth into 
hy glorious light, through the gates of death into a 
lendour beyond our comprehension. Our loving 
fhought shall follow and surround him; O take Thou 
is our gift of thought, imperfect though it be, and 





298 BURIAL OF THE DEAD 


touch it with the eternal Fire of Thy love, so thai 
it may become for him a guardian Angel to hely 
him on his upward way. Thus through Thy loving 
kindness may we in deep humility and reverence be 
come fellow-workers with Thy boundless power, ant 
may our weakness be supported by Thine infinit 
strength; that we, with this our dearly-beloves 
brother, may in due time attain unto the wisdon 
of the Spirit, Who with the Father and the So: 
liveth and reigneth, God throughout all ages of ages 
R. Amen. 


The followwg prayer may be added: 

*P, Almighty God, in Whose light do live th 
souls of them that depart hence in the Lord, an 
with Whom the faithful, after they are delivere 
from the burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity 
we give Thee hearty thanks, for that it hath please 
Thee to deliver this our brother out of the miserie 
of this mortal world, and do pray Thee that we ma 
be found worthy, together with all those that ai 
departed in the true faith of Thy holy Name, * 
stand before Thee hereafter in the ranks of Thy gloi 
ous Church triumphant. . Through Christ our Lor 
R. Amen. 


P. yy May the souls of all the departed throug 
the love of God rest in peace. R., Amen, 


P. yy The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, ant 
the love of God, and the fellowship of the He 
Ghost be with us all evermore. R. Amen. 





THE REQUIEM EUCHARIST 


In the Requiem Eucharist violet is the colour used, save 
in the case of children of tender years, when the colour 
is white. In such case also the word ‘‘child’’ is sub- 
stituted for ‘‘servant.’’ — 


The order of service is as usual, except for the points 
hereunder noted. 





THE INVOCATION 


P. In the Name of the Father, » and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


PSALM 90 
To be used instead of the Canticle. 


Antiphon 
God is our hope and strength. 
A very present help in trouble. 


1. Lord, Thou has been our refuge: from one 
generation to another. 

2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or 
ever the earth and the world were made: Thou art 
God from everlasting, and world without end. 

8. Thou turnest man to destruction: again Thou 
sayest, Come again, ye children of men. 


4, For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as 
yesterday: seeing that is past as a watch in the 
night. 

5. The days of our age are threescore years and 
ten; and though men be so strong that they come to 
fourscore years, yet is their strength then but labour 
and sorrow: so soon passeth it away, and we are 
gone. 

6. So teach us to number our days: that we may 
apply our hearts unto wisdom, 


300 THE REQUIEM EUCHARIST 


7. Show Thy servants Thy work: and their chil- 
dren of Thy glory. 

8. And the glorious majesty of the Lord our 
God be upon us: prosper Thou the work of our hands 
upon us, O prosper Thou our handiwork. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
God is our hope and strength. 
A very present help in trouble. 


INTROIT 


Rest in the eternal grant unto them, O Lord: 
and let light perpetual shine upon them. 


The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance: 
he shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 


Blessed is the man whom Thou choosest and re- 
ceivest unto Thee: he shall dwell in Thy court, and 
shall be satisfied with the pleasures of Thy house, 
even of Thy holy temple. 


Rest in the eternal grant unto them, O Lord: and 
let light perpetual shine upon them. 


THE COLLECTS 


The second and third Collects are as follows: 


Almighty God, Who hast dominion over both the 
living and the dead, and dost hold all Thy creation 
in the everlasting arms of Thy love, we offer this 
Holy Sacrifice that it may avail for the peace 
and repose of Thy servant, and that he, being dead | 
unto this world, yet ever living unto Thee, may find | 
in Thy continued and unceasing service the perfect | 
consummation of happiness and peace. Through 
Christ our Lord, R. Amen. 





THE REQUIEM EUCHARIST 301 


Likewise, O Lord, we pray Thee for those who love 
Thy servant, those whom Thou hast called to sacri- 
fice the solace of his earthly presence: do thou, O 
Lord, comfort them with the balm of Thy lovingkind- 
hess, that, strengthened by Thee and resting upon the 
surety of Thy wisdom, they may put aside their 
thoughts of grief and sorrow; and pour out upon 
him only such thoughts of love as may help him in 
the higher life of service to which Thou hast now 
called him. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


‘THE EPISTLE 


__ The Epistle is taken from the fifteenth chapter of 
the First Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corin- 
thians, beginning at the fifty-first verse, 

Behold, I show you a mystery; there is a natural 
body, and there is a spiritual body: for this corrup- 
tible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall 
have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have 
put on immortality; then shall be brought to pass the 
‘saying that is written: Death is swallowed up in 
victory. O death, where is thy sting? oO grave, 
where is thy victory? But thanks be to God, which 
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye Steadfast, un- 
movable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 
forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in 
vain in the Lord. 


: Here endeth the Epistle, 





THE GRADUAL. 


| 1, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy 
youth: while the evil days come not, nor the years 
draw nigh, when thou shalt Say, I have no pleasure 
in them. 


2. While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the 
tars, be not darkened: nor the clouds return after 
be rain, 


302 THE REQUIEM: EUCHARIST 


3. In the day when the keepers of the _ house 
shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow them- 
selves: and the grinders cease because they are few, 
and those that look out of the windows be darkened. 


4, And the doors shall be shut in the streets, 
when the sound of the grinding is low: and he shall 
rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daugh- 
ters of music shall be brought low. 


5, Also when they shall be afraid of that which 
is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond 
tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a 
burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to 
his long home, and the mourners go about the streets. 


6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden 
bowl be broken: or the pitcher be broken at the 
fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern. 


7. Then shall the dust return unto the earth as it 
was: and the spirit shall return unto God Who gave 
it. 


The Gospel 


The holy Gospel is taken from the eleventh chaptei 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the twenty 
first verse. a 


Then said Martha unto Jesus: Lord, if Thou hads 
been here, my brother had not died. But I knov 
that even now, whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God 
God will give it Thee. Jesus saith unto her 
Thy brother shall rise again. Martha  saitl 
unto Him: I know that he shall rise again ii 
the resurrection at the last day, Jesus said unt 
her: I am the Resurrection and the Life; he tha 
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall h 
live. And whosoever liveth and believeth in M 
shall never die. Believest thou this ? She sait' 
unto Him: Yea, Lord; I believe that Thou art th 
Christ, the Son of God, Which should come into th 
world, ay 


THE REQUIEM EUCHARIST 303 


\ In the case of children, the following Gospel is used: 


The. holy Gospel is taken from the tenth chapter of 
that according to St. Mark, beginning at the thirteenth 
verse. 


And they brought young children to Him, that 
He should touch them; and His disciples rebuked 
those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, 
He was much displeased, and said unto them: Suf- 
fer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid 
them not; for of such is the kingdom of God. Amen, 
I say unto you: Whosoever shall not receive the 
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter 
therein. And He took them up in His arms, put 
His hands upon them, and blessed them. 





COMMUNIO 


The Lord our God liveth for ever and ever: and 
we His children live in Him. 


They who know not the Lord are filled with fear: 
they have no sure stay, and their life lieth in dark- 
ness. 


But they that love Him walk in safety: neither 
fear they the shadow of death. 


For He is the Lord of life and death alike: and 
all the worlds are in His Hand. 


POSTCOMMUNIO 


P. We praise Thee, O Lord, that Thy compas- 
sionate wisdom which guided Thy child through 
the portal of birth hath now called him through 
death’s gateway to a fuller life with Thee. Enlight- 
en him, O heavenly Father, with the knowledge of 
Thy laws, that casting out all fear he may grow in 
grace, aS he labours in Thy holy service. Through © 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


P. The Lord be with you. 
C. And with thy spirit. 


304 THE REQUIEM EUCHARIST 





P. May he rest in peace. 
Cc. And may light perpetual shine upon him. 
P. Ite, missa est. 
C. Deo gratias. 
If the Burial does not immediately follow, the Charge 
given in that service may be read at this place. 
THE BENEDICTION 


P. The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, 
+ the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be upon all 
here present, both the living and the dead. R. 
Amen. 


HOLY ORDERS 


Holy Orders is the Sacrament by which, in their var- 
ious degrees, ministers of the Church receive power and 
authority to perform their sacred duties. Our Lord 
works through human agency, and to the end that those 
who are chosen for this sacred ministry as Bishops, 
Priests or Deacons, shall become readier channels for 
His grace, He has ordained that they shall be linked 
closely with Him by this holy rite, and shall thereby 
be empowered to administer His Sacraments and act’as 
almoners of His blessing. But it is most important 
that the people should remember that they receive all 
Sacraments from the Hand of Christ Himself, and that 
the officiant is but’ an instrument in that Hand. 





There are two groups of Orders in the Christian 
Church—the minor and the major; and there is a pre- 
liminary stage leading up to each group. The minor 
Orders are four, the major three; they may be tabu- 
lated as under. 

MINOR ORDERS 


Preliminary step: Cleric. 


1. Doorkeeper. 
2. Reader. 

3. Exorcist. 

4. Acolyte. 


MAJOR ORDERS. 


Preliminary step: Subdeacon. - 
1. Deacon. 
2. Priest. 
3. Bishop. 


THE CONFERRING OF MINOR ORDERS 


The degrees from Cleric to Acolyte inclusive may be 
conferred apart from the celebration of the Holy Euchar- 
ist; but only in the morning, except in the case of 
Cleric, which may be gwen at any hour. Tf, however, 
they are given during the Eucharist, the ordination to 
the degree of Cleric shall take place after the Intrott, 
and to the other four degrees after the Kyrie. 





THE ORDINATION OF CLERICS 


At the appointed time those about to be made Clerics 
are summoned by a Priest, as follows: 


Let those who are to be ordained to the Office of 
Cleric come forward. 


The ordinands rise from their seats and advance a few 
paces towards the Bishop, bearing lighted candles in 
their hands, They bow to him, the candles are then taken 
from them, and they are seated while the Bishop charges 
them, as follows: 


Those who in ancient days desired to dedicate 
their lives to the service of Christ’s holy Church 
were admitted, as a preliminary step, to this Order 
of Cleric. Being set apart from the life of the 
world, they were admonished to put away worldly 
distractions and secular desires, the abandonment 
of which, as typified by outer adornment of the per- 
son, was indicated by the shaving of hair from the 
head and the relinquishment of secular garb. 


You, who now come before us, are likewise mind- 
ed to dedicate yourselves to the service of Christ, 
and desire to enter this ancient Order that you may 
receive help and instruction in preparing yourselves — 
for the life of service. In these later days it is no 
longer necessary to be tonsured or to wear a special | 
dress outside of the church; but none the less is it 


i ORDINATION OF CLERICS 307 





true that he who wishes faithfully to serve the 
Christ must set himself apart from the world, in 
that considerations of Christ’s work must take pre- 
eminence over the fulfilment of merely personal de- 
sires. 


In this grade of Cleric you set before yourselves 
a great and glorious ideal—to become fellow-workers 
with God, to co-operate in His Plan for the perfect- 
ing of His creation. For this you must both learn 
self-control and acquire additional powers. Instead 
of allowing your body to direct and enslave you, you 
should endeavour to live for the soul. Wherefore 
as a first step you must learn in this grade of Cleric 
to control, and rightly to express yourselves through, 
the physical body, as in the next stage, that of Door- 
keeper, it will be your duty to control, and rightly 
to develop, the emotions, that whatever power in 
them lies may be used for the service of God. In 
the grade of Reader you are taught to take in hand 
the powers of the mind and devote those also to God’s 
service. Having thus diligently laboured at the 
training of the body, the emotions and the mind, 
you enter upon a higher phase of your work, and in 
the Order of Exorcist you develop more definitely 
the power of the will, that you may conquer evil in 
yourselves and such evil suggestions as may be im- 
posed upon you from outside; also you will now the 
better be able to help others to cast out evil from 
their natures. Above the grade of Exorcist lies 
that of Acolyte, wherein your task is to quicken 
the intuition and to open yourselves to all manner 
of spiritual influence. 


Beyond these grades, which among us are intended 
for the many, there lies for the few a higher, though 
straiter service; in which the man is to set him- 
self wholly apart for the service of the Christ, and, 
having passed the probationary grade of Subdeacon, 
enters upon the Greater Orders of Deacon and Priest. 
But even should you elect not to enter upon this 
higher path, yet happy indeed will you be, for even 


308 ORDINATION OF CLERICS 


in the Minor Orders you will have unfolded many 
powers within yourselves, and with those powers 
rightly developed and trained will be able to offer 
acceptable service to Him in Whose service alone is 
perfect freedom. 


In this Order of Cleric, then, you must learn 
self-control with regard to the body. It must be 
trained to habits of accuracy and neatness; it must 
‘be kept in perfect health and cleanliness, and you 
must see that it devotes its energies to God’s ser- 
vice, not in disorderliness and selfishness, but in har- 
mony and rhythm. In your gesture, in your man- 
ner and your speech, strive to show forth the ideal 
of beauty, never forgetting that our physical bodies 
are the temple of the Holy Ghost. Moreover, as 
you learn to respect your own body, so must you 
scrupulously respect the bodies of others, picturing 
them ever as the temple of the eternal Beauty. 


The charge being ended, the ordinands kneel before the 
Bishop, who rises and says: 


Let us pray. 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy chil- 
dren, look down in Thy love upon these Thy servants 
who desire to become worthy to serve Thee as Clerics 
in-Thy holy Church. Sanctify + them, O Lord, 
with Thy heavenly grace, that growing continually 
in virtue they may rightly practise the duties of 
their office and so be found acceptable in Thy sight, 
O Thou great King of Love, to Whom be glory for 
ever and ever. R. Amen. 


The ordinands kneel before the Bishop im succession. 
He places his right hand on the head of each, as he says: 


In the Name of Christ our Lord, I admit thee to 
the Order of Cleric. 


The Bishop places a surplice on each of the ordin- 
ands, saying to him: 


ORDINATION OF DOORKEEPERS: 309 


I clothe thee with the vesture of holiness, and do 
admonish thee diligently to develop the powers that 
are in thee, that thy service may be of good effect. 


Having ordained the several candidates, he blesses the 
new Clerics in the following words, unless they are 
immediately to receive another Order: 


The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost come down upon you, 
that you may rightly fulfil that which to-day you 
have undertaken. R. Amen. 


THE ORDINATION OF DOORKEEPERS 


At the appointed time those about to be made Door- 
keepers are summoned by a Priest, as follows: 


“Let those who are to be ordained to the Office of 
Doorkeeper come forward. 


The ordinands rise from their seats and advance a 
few paces towards the Bishop, bearing lighted candles 
in their hands. They bow to him, the candles are then 
taken from them, and they are seated while the Bishop 
charges them, as follows: ‘ 

It was the duty of the Doorkeeper in olden times 
to ring the church bells, to open the church at the 
appointed times to the faithful but to keep it ever 
closed to unbelievers, to open the book for the preach- 
er and to guard with diligence the church furniture, 
lest any should be lost. In our time these functions 
no longer appertain to the Order of Doorkeeper, but 
rather do we treat them as symbolical, and invest 
them with a moral significance. It will thus be 
your duty as Doorkeepers to keep the keys of your 
heart, to open the heart at all times for the expres- 
sion of that which is noble and good, but sternly 
to keep it closed against evil and unworthy sugges- 
tions. As it is your duty to keep your own heart, 
so should you also seek to predispose the hearts of 
others to things which are beautiful, and in persua- 
sive language to set forth to them the attractiveness 


310 ORDINATION OF DOORKEEPERS 


of noble ideals. Thus may you, in these days, dis- 
charge the duties of service which marked the work 
of our earlier brethren. 


In this degree you learn control of the emotions 
and passions, as before you learned to master the 
crude instincts of the physical body. There are 
those who have thought of emotion as necessarily 
evil, and have taught others to uproot it from the 
nature. Not for you is it to think thus. God has 
given us the power to feel emotion, and it, too, is 
a power which can become mighty in His service. 
At whatever stage a man’s emotions may. be, they 
represent the working of the divine power within 
him, and should not be suppressed, but raised and 
consecrated to the service of God. If through care- 
lessness. or selfishness the emotions have been allow- 
ed to become self-centred, it is our duty not to kill 
them out, but to purify and raise them; to substitute 
for devotion to our own pleasure devotion to God 
and humanity; to put aside, as far as may be, af- 
fection for self for the affection that gives, caring 
nothing for any return; not to ask love, but to give 
love. Hence it is your task as Doorkeepers to train 
your emotions, laying them as a gift on Christ’s holy 
Altar, that they too may be used in His service. 


The charge being ended, the ordinands kneel before 
the Bishop, who rises and says: 


Let us pray. 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to. receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy chil- 
dren, look down in Thy love upon these Thy ser- 
vants who desire to become worthy to serve Thee as 
Doorkeepers in Thy holy Church. Sanctify + them, 
O Lord, with Thy heavenly grace, that growing con- 
tinually in virtue they may rightly practise the 
‘duties of their office and so be found acceptable in 
‘Thy sight, O Thou great King of Love, to Whom be 
glory for ever and ever. R. Amen. 


ORDINATION OF READERS 311 


The ordinands kneel before the Bishop in succession. 
He places his right hand on the head of each as he says: 


In the Name of Christ our Lord, I admit thee to 
the Order of Doorkeeper. 


The Bishop hands a key and a bell to each ordinand in 
turn, saying: 


Like as he who bears the key throws open the 
church for the use of all mankind, so shalt thou throw 
open the doors of thy heart for the service of thy _ 
brethren. And as he who rings the bell summons 
men to divine worship, so by the force of good example 
shalt thou also summon men to the service of God. 

Each ordinand locks and unlocks the door of the 
church and rings the bell thrice. 


Having ordained the several candidates, he blesses the 
new Doorkeepers in the following words, unless they are 
immediately to receive another Order: 


The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost come down upon you, 
that you may rightly fulfil that which to-day you 
have undertaken. KR. Amen. 


THE ORDINATION OF READERS 


At the appointed time those about to be made Readers 
are summoned by a Priest, as follows: 


Let those who are to be ordained to the Office of 
Reader come forward. 


The ordinands rise from’ their ‘seats and advance a 
few paces towards the Bishop, bearing lighted candles 
in their hands. They bow to him, the candles are then 
taken from them, and they are seated while the Bishop 
charges them, as follows: 


We learn from ancient tradition that it belonged 
to the Reader in olden times to read for him who 
was about to preach, to intone the lessons, to bless 
bread and all first-fruits. The passage of time has 
stripped the office of Reader of these duties and its 


312 ORDINATION OF READERS 


functions, but it is still of the essence of his office 
that he dedicate the gifts of his mind to the glory of 
God. You have learned in the preceding Orders 
that you should control the physical body and train 
the emotions for service; and you will have seen 
from experience that in so far as your affection has . 
been bestowed upon others you have greatly helped 
to develop affection in them. It is now your duty 
at once to train your own mind and to infiuence for 
good the minds of others. As you have had to con- 
quer and control wrong tendencies of emotion, so now 
is it also necessary to discipline your thought; for 
just as you know that the physical body is not your- 
self, nor your emotions, however glorious and beauti- 
ful they may be, so also the mind is not you. Your 
thought is a power, splendid and great, given to you 
for the service of God: it also has to be your ser- 
vant and not your master. It needs careful train- 
ing, and that training is the especial purpose of this 
step which you are about to take. You will find 
yourselves prone to wandering thought; this you must 
conquer. You must develop within yourselves the 
power of concentration, that you may study effec- 
tively and communicate the results of that study to 
others, 


As you had to learn to purify emotion, so also must 
your mind be pure. As you learned to perceive the 
necessity for physical cleanliness, or to throw off 
with repugnance the lower emotion, so also must you 
thrust away unworthy thought, remembering that all 
thought is unworthy that is impure, selfish, mean or 
base; such, for example, as would seek for flaws in- 
stead of gems in thinking of the character or work 
of another. All such thought is impure beside the 
white light of the thought of the Christ, Who is 
our pattern and perfect ensample. Wherefore as 
Readers it is your duty to train and develop the 
powers of your mind, to study and fit yourselves that 
you may help to train and develop the minds of 
others. 


ORDINATION OF EXORCISTS 313 





The charge being ended, the ordinands kneel before 
the Bishop, who rises and says: 


Let us pray. 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy chil- 
dren, look down in Thy love upon these Thy ser- 
vants who desire to become worthy to serve Thee 
as Readers in Thy holy Church. Sanctify + them, 
O Lord, with Thy heavenly grace, that growing 
continually in virtue they may rightly practise the 
duties of their office and so be found acceptable in 
Thy sight, O-Thou great King of Love, to Whom be 
glory for ever and ever. R. Amen. 


The ordinands kneel before the Bishop in succession. 
He places his right hand on the head of each, as he says: 

In the name of Christ our Lord, I admit thee to the 
Order of Reader. 


The Bishop hands a book to each ordinand, saying: 


Study diligently the Sacred Science, that thou may- 
est the better be able to devote thy mind and all its 
powers to the service of God. 


Having ordained the several candidates, he blesses the 
new Readers in the following words, unless they are im- 
mediately to receive another Order: 

The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost come down upon you, 


that you may rightly fulfil that which to-day you 
have undertaken. R. Amen. 


THE ORDINATION OF EXORCISTS 
At the appointed time those about to be made Eaor- 
cists are summoned by a Priest, as follows: 
Let those who are to be ordained to the Office of 
Exorcist come forward. 


The ordinands rise from their seats and advance a few 
paces towards the Bishop, bearing lighted candles in 


314 ORDINATION OF EXORCISTS 





their hands. They bow to him, the candles are then taken 
from them, and they are seated while the Bishop charges 
them, as follows: 


It was the duty of the Exorcist in the ancient 
Church to cast out devils, to warn the people that 
non-communicants should make room for those who 
were going to communion, and to pour out the water 
needed in divine service. The Book of Exorcisms 
was handed to him with the words: ‘‘Take and com- 
mit this to memory, and receive the power to lay 
hands on demoniacs, whether they be baptized or 
catechumens.’’ The candidate was admonished that 
as he cast out devils from the bodies of others he 
should rid his own mind and body of all unclean- 
ness and wickedness, lest he be overcome by those 
whom he drove out of others by his ministry. For 
then only would he be able safely to exercise mastery 
over the demons in others, when he should first 
have overcome their manifold wickedness within 
himself. 


Such exorcism as is now performed in the Church 
is undertaken only by those who have been ordained 
Priest, and even for them a special authorization is 
usually required; also with the passage of time the 
other duties attaching to the Office of Exorcist have 
fallen into abeyance. Moreover, our conception of 
these matters is different in some respects from that 
entertained in former times. Men of old thought 
of temptation as being due to the attacks of demons 
from without. But in truth this is not generally 
so, There lies behind each one of us a past which, 
since we are growing in grace, must have been less 
desirable than the present. There are habits; very 
instincts, built into the bodies, which rise against us 
when we try to live the higher life. This which we 
try to conquer is not a devil of great power attack- 
ing us from outside, nor is it even inherent wicked- 
ness in ourselves. It is the consequence and relic 
of earlier action permitted in days of ignorance. 
In this grade of Exorcist it is your duty by strenuous 


ORDINATION OF EXORCISTS 315 





effort to develop the power of the will, and by its 
exercise to cast out from yourselves the evil spirit 
of separateness and selfishness. Having learned to 
control your own evil habits, you will have greater 
power to help others to cast out the evil from them- 
selves, not only by example but by precept, and even 
by direct action on your part. In olden time it was 
often true, and still in rare cases remains true, that, 
through weakness or by persistence in evil, men al- 
lowed their bodies to become obsessed or partially 
controlled by evil spirits. To some, especial power 
and authority are given to hold unclean spirits in 
check and to cast out this evil influence from the 
bodies of others. There are some, too, who possess 
the gift of healing, and are able by the virtue flow- 
ing from them to alleviate suffering and soothe af- 
flictions of the body; this gift may likewise be 
strengthened in the Order of Exorcist; indeed, in 
ancient times the Exorcist was regarded as a healer in 
the Church. 


Wherefore, dearly beloved sons, strive diligently 
in this new office to which you are called to exercise 
mastery over yourselves, that you may the more ef- 
fectively help others to gain a similar mastery over 
their weakness. 


The charge being ended, the ordinands kneel before 
the Bishop, who rises and says: 


Let us pray. 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy chil- 
dren, look down in Thy love upon these Thy ser- 
vants who desire to become worthy to ‘serve Thee as 
Exorcists in Thy holy Church. Sanctify -+ them, 
O Lord, with Thy heavenly grace, that growing con- 
tinually in virtue they may rightly practise the 
duties of their office and so be found acceptable in 
Thy sight, O Thou great King of’Love, to Whom 
be glory for ever and ever. R. Amen. 


316 ORDINATION OF ACOLYTES 


The ordinands kneel before the Bishop in succession. 
He places his right hand on the head of each, as he 
says: 


In the Name of Christ our Lord, I admit thee to 
the Order of Exorcist. 


Lhe Bishop hands a sword and a book to each ordin- 
and, saying: 

Take this sword for a. symbol of the will, and this 
book for a symbol of knowledge, whereby thou shalt 
be strong in the warfare of the spirit. 


Having ordained the several candidates, he blesses the 
new Eaxorcists in the following words, unless they are 
immediately to receive another Order: 


The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost come down upon you, 
that you may rightly fulfil that which to-day you 
have undertaken. R. Amen. 


THE ORDINATION OF ACOLYTES 


At the appointed time those about to be made Acolytes 
are summoned by a Priest, as follows: 


Let those who are to be ordained to the Office 
of Acolyte come forward. 


The ordinands rise from their seats and advance a 
few paces towards the Bishop, bearing lighted candles 
in their hands. They bow to him, the candles are then 
taken from them, and they are seated while the Bishop 
charges them, as follows: 


It was the duty of the Acolyte in olden times to 
carry the candlestick, to light the tapers and lamps 
of the church, and to present wine and water for 
the Eucharistic offering. These duties are no longer 
confined to the Acolyte, but are usually discharged by 
lay boys or men; therefore, as in the case of the 
previous Orders, we treat the duties as symbolical 
and invest them with a moral significance. Where ~ 
the Acolyte served before the Altar of the church, 


ORDINATION OF ACOLYTES 317 


you now serve before the altar of the human heart, 
on which each man must truly offer himself as a sac- 
rifice to God. You will have noticed that in the 
former degrees the training consisted partly in the 
cultivation of your own powers, but also in learning 
to exercise those powers for the helping of others. 
Assuredly this training through which you have pass- 
ed were vain did it not lead you for Christ’s sake to 
consecrate your powers to the wider interests of hu- 
manity. Remember the words of the Christ, how 
He said, ‘‘Whosoever will be great among you let him 
be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among 
you let him be your servant: even as the Son of 
Man came not to be ministered unto but to minister.’’ 
Wherefore as you are about to offer yourselves to 
Him to be enrolled in the fellowship of those who 
seek to be in very truth spiritual servers of the world, 
do you endeavour in singleness of heart to perform 
the office you now undertake. For then only will 
you meetly present wine and water to be used at the 
Sacrifice of God, when by the continual practice of 
unselfishness you shall have offered yourselves as 
an acceptable sacrifice to God. 


In the ancient symbolism of this Order the candi- 
date, in addition to receiving a cruet as the visible 
token of this sacrifice, is also given a candlestick 
with a candle, and told that he is bound to light the 
lights of the church in the Name of the Lord. That 
lighting of lights may be your duty in the literal 
sense, and it should be done, as indeed should all 
duties of the daily life, as an act of service in the 
Name of the Lord. But it is also intended that 
you should bear ever with you the spiritual light of 
Christ’s holy Presence, and strive to enkindle that 
sense of His Presence within the hearts of your 
brethren, who form the great catholic Church of hu- 
manity. In many forms of religious faith light has 
been taken as a symbol of Deity—the Light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. That 
Light is universal, but it also dwells in the heart of 


318 ' ORDINATION OF ACOLYTES 


man. It is our duty to see that Light in everyone, 
however dimly it may burn, however veiled and dark- 
ened it may appear to our ordinary perception. And 
having learned thus to recognize the Light both in 
ourselves and in others, we may help them to cause 
that radiance of their inner Divinity to shine forth 
in its pristine glory and splendour, till the Light 
within becomes one with the universal Light without. 
To this end, indeed, are we constantly admonished in 
the words of the Christian scriptures: ‘‘Let your 
light so shine before men that they may see your good 
works and glorify your Father Who is in heaven.’’ 
‘‘They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of 
the firmament, but they that turn many to righteous- 
ness as the stars for ever and ever.’’ ‘‘Let your 
loins be girded about and your lights burning.’’ 
Again, the Apostle Paul says: ‘‘Inthe midst of a crook- 
ed and perverse generation, among whom shine ye as 


lights in the world.’’ ‘‘Let us therefore cast off — 
the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour 
of light.’’ ‘‘For ye were sometimes darkness, but 


now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of 
light.’’ 


This degree of Acolyte is intended to help you to 
quicken your spiritual faculties, and especially the 
intuition through which the light of the divine love 
and wisdom may lighten your understanding. As 
you fulfil worthily your ministry by helping others, 
so shall you be helped by those Great Ones, Whose 
ears are never deaf, Whose hearts are never closed 
against the world They love. 


_ The charge being ended, the ordinands kneel before 
the Bishop, who rises and says: 


Let. us pray. 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy chil- 
dren, look down in Thy love upon these Thy ser- 
vants who desire to become worthy to serve Thee as 
Acolytes in Thy holy Church. Sanctify + them, 





ORDINATION OF ACOLYTES 319 


O Lord, with Thy heavenly grace, that growing con- 
tinually in virtue they may rightly practise the 
duties of their office and so be found acceptable in 
Thy sight, O Thou great King of Love, to aS 
be glory for ever and ever. R. Amen. 


The ordinands kneel before the Bishop in succession. 
He places his right hand on the head of each, saying: 


In the Name of Christ our Lord, I admit thee to 
the Order of Acolyte. 

The. Bishop hands a candlestick with lighted candle 
to each ordinand, saying: 

As thou. dost bear this visible light, so shalt thou 
ever shed around thee the brightness of the divine 
Light. 

The Bishop hands a cruet to each ordinand, saying: 


See to it that thou dost pour out thy life in union 
with the great Sacrifice by which the world is main- 
tained. 


The Bishop endues each ordinand with the badge of 
the Order, saying: 

I endue thee with the badge of the Order of Acolyte; 
see that thou dost use it as a channel of Christ’s love 
for men. 

Let us pray. 

O Christ, the Lord of Love, we worship at Thy Feet, 
and once more we dedicate ourselves to Thy service; 
let the seven Rays of Thine ineffable glory shine 
through these sacred symbols, that they may ever be 
as radiant suns to those who wear them, and foun- 
tains of light and benison to all Thy faithful people, 
Thou Who lovest and reignest for ever. R. Amen. 

Having ordained the several candidates, he blesses the 
new Acolytes in the following words, unless they are 
immediately to recewe another Order: 

The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost come down upon you, 
that you may with steadfastness and zeal persevere 
in that. which to-day you have undertaken. R. Amen. 


THE ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 





The Bishop celebrates the Holy Eucharist, using the 
following special Collect: 


THE COLLECT 


Almighty everlasting God, by Whose Spirit the 
whole body of the Church is made holy and govern- 
ed, do Thou pour forth Thy sanctifying grace into 
the hearts of these Thy servants, who are about to 
be numbered among the Subdeacons of Thy Church, 
that with pure heart and open mind they may faith- 
fully receive Thy blessing from on high. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Collect of the Day and the Collect for Peace fol- 
low here. 


The Collects being ended, the Bishop takes his seat 
upon a faldstool before the Altar. The ordinands come 
forward bearing Vighted candles. The Bishop charges 
them as follows: 


Dearly beloved sons, this Order of Subdeacon is 
a grade of probation for the Greater Orders of Dea- 
con and Priest. It gives to those who receive it 
greater strength and steadfastness of purpose, to 
the end that with singleness of heart they may dedi- 
cate their lives to Christ in His holy Church. So 
great, indeed, is the responsibility laid upon those 
who in these Greater Orders become Christ’s repre- 
sentatives, that a season of trial in this preparatory 
grade of the Subdiaconate is ofttimes appointed, 
wherein they who aspire to so sublime an estate may 
test themselves if need be, more especially if they 
be young in body or in experience of matters ecclesi- 
astical, that they enter not lightly or unadvisedly 
upon so solemn an undertaking. 


You, well-beloved sons, having already offered 
yourselves to the service of God and to help forward 





——————————S eee 


ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 321 


His kingdom upon earth, are now moved in your 
hearts to devote yourselves still further to His ser- 
vice and to that of your brethren. On this purpose 
we invoke the Divine blessing; and, with the help 
and ready concurrence of the faithful here assembled, 
shall now proceed in the exercise of our office to bring 
you as a holy oblation into the Presence of Christ, 
not doubting that at the latter end you, having the 
witness of faithful service, will shine, pure and lus- 
trous, as jewels in the crown of our Master. 


The Bishop rises and addresses the congregation as 
follows: 


Let us then pray, dearest brethren, that Almighty 
God in His great lovingkindness and watchful care 
over His Church may bestow a plentiful grace on 
these Acolytes, now about to be raised to the Order 
of the Subdiaconate. 


LITANY. 


All kneel and sing the following Litany, during which 
the ordinands lie prostrate: 


[If it should happen that the candidates are all to 
‘eceive the Diaconate immediately after this Order, the 
Litany given in the service for the Ordination of a 
Deacon is here substituted. | 


God the Father, seen of none, 

God the Co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit, with Them One; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


God eternal, mighty King, 

Unto Thee, our love we bring; 

Through the world Thy praises ring; 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove, 

Dew descending from above, 

Breath of life and Fire of love; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


2 ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 





Source of strength, of knowledge clear, 
Wisdom, godliness sincere, 
Understanding, counsel, cheer; 

Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Source of courage, love and peace, 

Patience, pureness, faith’s increase, 

Hope and joy that cannot cease; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Spirit guiding us aright, 
Spirit making darkness light, 
Spirit of resistless might; 

Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Thine is an unchanging love 
Higher than the heights above; 
Lord, life-giver, holy Dove; 

Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Come to aid the souls who yearn 

More of truth Divine to learn, 

And with deeper love to burn; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Keep us in the narrow way, 

Warn us when we go astray, 

Fill us with Thy glorious Ray; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


May we from temptation turn, 

Secrets of Thy kingdom learn, 

Feel Thy Fire within us burn; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Help us nobly to endure, 

Keep us faithful, keep us pure, 

Ever wiser, stronger, truer; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 





ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 323 


Light and strength on us bestow, 

Guide us, lead us here below, 

Where Thou willest we shall go; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


To the outcast and forlorn, 

To the weary and the worn, 

Let Thy hope and peace be borne; 
Bless them, Holy Spirit. 


Fount of love, by all adored, 

Let the wisdom of the Lord 

On His waiting Church be poured; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Still unsheathed be Thy sword 

Till the world, from sin restored 

Is the kingdom of the Lord; 
Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


Holy, loving as Thou art, 
All Thy sevenfold gifts impart, 
Nevermore from us depart; 

Hear us, Holy Spirit. 


The three verses which follow.are sung by the Bishop 
only. 


We beseech Thee, hear our prayer; 
Bless + Thy servants, prostrate there; 
Hold them in Thy loving care; 

Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Hear Thy servants as they pray, 

Help Thy chosen ones to-day, 

Bless + and + hallow them for aye; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Pour Thy lovingkindness great 
On each chosen candidate, ji 
Bless -+ them, + hallow, + consecrate; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 
L2 


324 ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 
The following verse is sung by all: 


God the Father, seen of none, 
God the Co-eternal Son, 
God the Spirit, with Them One; 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


The people are seated. 


The Bishop and ordinands are again seated, and the 
Bishop charges them in this wise: 


Dearly beloved sons, who are about to be admitted 
to the office of Subdeacon, you should know what 
manner of ministry was in former times committed 
unto your Order. It appertained to the Subdeacon 
to provide water for the service of the Altar, to min- 
ister to the Deacon, to wash the Altar cloths and 
‘corporals, to present to the Deacon the chalice and 
paten to be used at the Sacrifice, to guard the church 
doors or the gates of the sanctuary, and in later 
times to read the Epistles before the people. En- 
deavour, then, by fulfilling readily with neatness and 
diligence such of these visible ministries as are still 
part of your office, to show true reverence for the 
invisible things they may be said to typify. For 
the Altar of holy Church is the throne of Christ 
Himself, and it is indeed fitting that they who min- 
ister before it should walk circumspectly, and rea- 
lize that upon them is laid the high honour of its 
guardianship. Do you therefore take heed that you 
be watchful sentinels of the heavenly warfare, so 
that growing ever in virtue you may shine, lustrous 
and chaste, in the company of the saints. Strive 
earnestly to pattern yourselves after the ensample 
of our divine Master, that you may meetly minister 
at the divine Sacrifice, as well in the invisible sanc- 
tuary of your hearts as in the visible sanctuary of 
holy Church. 


From ancient times, also, it has been required of 
those who enter this Order that they strive to acquire 
certain virtues of character, such as are typified by 


ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 325 


the vestments delivered unto them. By the amice, 
control of speech; by the maniple, the love of service 
or diligence in all good works; by the tunicle, the 
spirit of joy and gladness, or freedom from care and 
depression, that is to say, confidence in the Good 
Law, which may be interpreted as a recognition of 
the Plan revealed by Almighty God for the perfect- 
ing of His creation. 


The ordinands rise. 


B. Will you then strive, as far as in you lies, to 
order your lives in accordance with these precepts ? 


Ordinands. I will. 


B. The Lord keep you in all these things, well- 
beloved sons, and strengthen you in all goodness. R. 
Amen. 


The Bishop rises, and with hands extended towards 
the ordinands, who kneel before him, says the follow- 
ing prayer: 

O Lord Christ, the Fountain of all goodness, Who - 
bestowest upon all who serve Thee in Thy holy Church 
the gifts pertaining to their several offices, gracious- 
ly regard these Thy servants whom we now present 
for the Order of the Subdiaconate, and so + open 
their hearts and minds to Thy heavenly grace that they 
may be steadfast in Thy holy service. Increase in 
them, O Lord, the sevenfold gift of the Spirit, that, 
growing in the knowledge of things eternal, they 
may offer their lives as a holy and continual sacri- 
fice unto Thee, O Thou great King of Love, to Whom 
be praise and adoration from men and from the Angel 
host. R. Amen. 


The ordinands kneel before the Bishop in succession. 
He places his right hand on the head of each, and SAYS: 


In the Name of our Lord Christ, I admit thee to 
the Order of Subdeacon. 


The Bishop is seated, He hands an empty chalice 


326 ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 


and paten to each ordinand, who touches it with the 
right hand, while the Bishop says: 


Take heed to that the ministry whereof is com- 
mitted to thee; I admonish thee so to demean thy- 
self in thy ministry as to be commendable in the 
sight of God. 


The Bishop touches the amice which is upon the neck 
of each ordinand, saying: 

Take the amice, by which restraint of the tongue 
is signified. In the Name of the + Father, and 
of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The Bishop places the maniple on the left arm of each, 
saying : 

Take the maniple, by which is meant the fruit of 
good works. In the Name of the + Father, and 
of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The Bishop vests one after another in the tunicle, 
' saying: 


May the Lord clothe thee with the garment of glad- 
ness and the vesture of joy. In the Name of the 
+ Father, and of the + Son, and of the Holy + 
Ghost. R. Amen. 


The Bishop hands to each the Book of Epistles, say- 
ing as he touches it with the right hand: 


Take the Book of Hpistles, and receive authority 
to read them in God’s holy Church, both for the 
living and the dead. In the Name of the + Father, 
and of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. BR. 
Amen. 


He rises, and blesses them in this wise: 


The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost come down upon you 
that with steadfastness and zeal you may persevere 
in that which to-day you have undertaken. R, Amen 





ORDINATION OF SUBDEACONS 327 


One of the newly ordained Subdeacons, vested in tun- 
icle, reads the Epistle of the Day. 


The Holy Eucharist is then continued to its close. 


IN THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION 


In the Prayer of Consecration the following clause is 
inserted after the words: ‘‘for all our Bishops, clergy 
and faithful’’: 

Especially for these whom in Christ’s holy Name 
we have admitted to the Order of the Subdiaconate. 





THE ORDINATION OF DEACONS 





The Bishop celebrates the Holy Eucharist, at which 
the following special Collect and Epistle are used: 


THE COLLECT 


Almighty everlasting God, by Whose Spirit the 
whole body of the Church is made holy and govern- 
ed, do Thou pour forth Thy sanctifying grace into 
the hearts of these Thy servants, who are about to 
pe numbered among the Deacons of Thy Church, that 
with pure heart and: open mind they may faithfully 
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. Through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Collect of the Day and the Collect for Peace fol- 
low here. 


THE EPISTLE 


The Epistle is taken from the fourth chapter of the 
Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians, be- 
ginning at the seventh verse. 


But unto every one of us is given grace according 
to the measure of the gift of Christ. And He gave 
some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evange- 
lists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the’ per- 
fecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for 
the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in 
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son 
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of 
the stature of the fullness of Christ. That we hence- 
forth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and 
carried about with every wind of doctrine; but, 
speaking the truth in love, may grow up into Him 
in all things, Who is the head, even Christ; from 
Whom the whole body fitly joined together and com- 
pacted by that which every joint supplieth, accord- 


ORDINATION OF DEACONS 329 


ing to the effectual working in the measure of every 
part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying 
of itself in love. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Epistle being ended, the Bishop takes his seat 
upon a faldstool before the Altar. The ordinands come 
forward bearing lighted candles, and a Priest appointed 
for the purpose presents them to the Bishop, saying: 

Right Reverend Father, our holy Mother the 
Church catholic prays that you would ordain these 
Subdeacons here present to the charge of the Diacon- 
ate. 


Bishop. Knowest thou them to be worthy ? 


P. As far as human frailty allows me to judge, I 
do both know and attest that they are worthy of the 
charge of this office. 


B. Thanks be to God. 


The ordinands are then seated, and the Bishop charges 
the clergy and people as follows: 

Dearly beloved brethren, these Subdeacons here 
before you are presented for the Order of the Diacon- 
ate, to be irrevocably set apart for the service of 
Christ by the gift of God’s most holy Spirit. Mind- 
ful of the sacred trust reposed in us, we have sought 
to ensure that only such as may be profitable to 
Christ’s holy Church be thus presented; yet for fur- 
ther precaution it is seemly that we should enquire 
if any know cause or just impediment why these 
persons should not be admitted to the exercise of the 
Deacon’s ofiice. If, then, any of you know aught 
against them, in the Name of God and for the benefit 
of His Church, let him boldly come forward and 
speak; howbeit, let him be mindful of his own estate. 


After a pause, the Bishop, addressing himself to the 
ordinands, charges them as follows: 
Dearly beloved sons, who are now about to be 


330 ORDINATION OF DEACONS 


raised to the Order of Deacon, do you endeavour 
to receive it worthily, and blamelessly to fulfil its 
duties when you have received it. It appertains 
to the Deacon to minister at the Altar, to read or 
intone the Gospel, to preach, and in the absence of 
the Priest to baptize. Wherefore, dearly beloved sons, 
as now you are charged to minister to the flock of 
Christ, be you raised above all unworthy propensities 
which war against the soul; be seemly, courteous in 
demeanour, and full of noble desires and of love for 
God and man, as befits the ministers of Christ and 
stewards charged to dispense the mysteries of God. 
And as you now have a share in offering and dis- 
pensing the Body and Blood of the Lord, as Holy 
Writ has it: ‘‘Be ye clean, ye that bear the ves- 
sels of the Lord.’’ Be it your care to set forth to 
others, by living deeds, the gospel your lips will pro- 
claim to them, that of you it may be said: ‘‘How 
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him 
that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace.’’ 


The ordinands rise. 


B. Will you thus strive to use worthily the powers 
entrusted to you? 


Ordinands. I will. 


B. The Lord keep you in all these things, well- 
beloved sons, and strengthen you in all goodness. 
R. Amen. 


The Bishop rises and addresses the people as follows: 


Let us pray, dearest brethren, that Almighty God 
in His great lovingkindness and watchful care over 
His Church may bestow a plentiful grace upon these 
Subdeacons now about to be raised to the Order of 
the Diaconate. 


LITANY 


All kneel and sing the following Litany, during which 
the ordinands lie prostrate. 


ORDINATION OF DEACONS 331 


Should the Subdiaconate have been conferred dur- 
ing this same service, this Litany will already have been 
sung, and will not therefore be repeated. 


God the Father, seen of none, 

God the co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit, with Them One; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


God Eternal, mighty King, 

Unto Thee our love we bring; 

Through the world Thy praises ring; 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


Christ, the Lord of Life and Light, 
Ruler of the starry height, 
Fount of glory infinite, 

Thee we worship, Master. 


Mighty Lord, we hail Thee here, 

Recognize Thy Presence dear, 

Feel and know that Thou art near, 
Keeping thus Thy promise. 


Though Thy face we cannot see 

As of old in Galilee, 

Strong in faith we worship Thee, 
Ever-present Master. 


From, our fathers we have heard 

Of the gift Thy Hand conferred; 

We have proved Thy holy word; 
Be that gift outpoured. 


Though Thy form from earth hath gone, 
Thine Apostles handed on 
Sacramental benison; 

Be that blessing with us. 


We this power would now convey, 

Strengthen Thou our hands, we pray, 

Pour Thy might through us to-day, 
Hear us, Holy Master. 


332 ORDINATION OF DEACONS 


Monarch, at Thy Feet we kneel, 
For Thy servants we appeal, 
Fill their hearts with holy zeal 

In Thy service, Master. 


Thou of holy Church the Head, 

Mystic power upon them shed, 

By Thy love may they be led; 
Hear us, Holy Master. 


Link in mystic bond with Thee 
These Thy Deacons; may they be 
From the world and self set free 

By Thy power, O Master, 


May they stand before Thy Face 

Filled with love and heavenly grace; 

Grant them with Thy saints a place 
Near Thee, Lord and Master. 


The three verses which follow are sung by the Bishop 
only: 


We beseech Thee, hear our prayer; 
Bless -- Thy servants, prostrate there; 
Hold them in Thy loving care; 

Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Hear Thy servants as they pray; 

Help Thy chosen ones to-day, 

Bless + and + hallow them for aye; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 

Pour Thy lovingkindness great 

On each chosen candidate; 

Bless + them, + hallow, + consecrate; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 

All sing: 

God the Father, seen of none, 

God the co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit, with Them One, 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


ORDINATION OF DEACONS 333 


The people are seated. 


The Bishop rises, and with hands extended towards the 
ordinands, who kneel before him, says the following 
prayer: 

O Lord Christ, the Fountain of all goodness, Who 
by the operation of the Holy Spirit hast appointed 
divers Orders in Thy Church, and for its greater en- 
richment and perfecting dost pour down Thy gifts 
abundantly upon men, we pray Thee to + open to 
Thy heavenly grace the hearts and minds of these 
Thy servants who are about to be numbered among 
the Deacons of Thy Church, that through them Thy 
power may abundantly flow for the service of Thy 
people. For our part, as men lacking the divine 
insight, and ignorant of the supreme judgment, we 
have enquired into their lives to the best of our 
ability. But what to us is unknown cannot escape 


Thee, O Lord, nor are hidden things concealed from - 


Thee. Thou penetratest all secrets, Thou art the 
Searcher of hearts, Thou wilt test their lives by Thy 
heavenly judgment, wherein Thou dost ever prevail. 
Wherefore we pray Thee, O Lord and heavenly Mas- 
ter, to hallow and strengthen with Thy mighty + 
blessing these whom we now set apart to the end 
that they may minister at Thy holy Altars and to 
the well-being of Thy faithful people. Increase in 
them, O Lord, the gifts of the Holy Spirit, that they 
may be strong and of a good courage and, surmount- 
ing doubt and imperfection, may purchase to them- 
selves a good degree and a great boldness in the faith, 
O Thou great Ruler of the hearts of men, to Whom 
be praise and adoration from men and from the 
Angel host. R. Amen. ; 


All kneel while the Veni Creator is sung. 


VENI CREATOR 


Come, Thou Creator Spirit blest, 

And in our souls take up Thy rest; 

Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid, 
To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. 


334 ORDINATION OF DEACONS 





Great Paraclete, to Thee we cry; 

O highest gift of God most high; 
O living Fount, O Fire, O Love, 
And sweet anointing from above. 


Thou in Thy sevenfold gifts art known; 
Thee, Finger of God’s Hand, we own; 
The promise of the Father, Thou 

Who dost the tongue with power endow. 


Kindle our senses from above, 

And make our hearts o’erflow with love; 
With patience firm and virtue high 

The weakness of our flesh supply. 


Far let us drive our tempting foe, 
And Thine abiding peace bestow; 

So shall we not, with Thee for guide, 
Turn from the path of life aside. 


O may Thy grace on us bestow 

The Father and the Son to know, 

And Thee, through endless times confessed, 
Of both eternal Spirit blest. 


All glory while the ages run 

Be to the Father and the Son, 

Who gave us life; the same to Thee, 
O Holy Ghost, eternally. Amen. 


The Bishop rises and imposes his right hand upon the 
head of each ordinand, saying to each: 


Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of 
a Deacon in the Church of God. 


The Bishop with his hand extended towards the new- 
ly ordained Deacons, continues: 


O God the Holy Ghost, Who hast deigned to de- 


scend upon these Thy servants in spirit and in power, 
strengthen them with Thy sevenfold might for the 


ORDINATION OF DEACONS 335 


faithful performance of this ministry. May that 
power ever flow forth in their actions and kindle 
their speech; may they be resolute and steadfast in 
the service of their brethren, so that, having al- 
ways the witness of a good conscience, they may 
continue strong and stable in Christ, pillars in the 
temple of our God, Thou Who with the Father and 
the Son livest and reignest, God throughout all ages 
of ages. R. Amen. 


The Bishop is seated, and vests each new Deacon with 
a white stole, which is placed over the left shoulder and 
fastened under the right arm. He makes the sign of 
the cross over the heart of each new Deacon, as he says: 


Take thou the white + stole for a symbol of 
thine office; remembering that as for the service 
and love of man thou dost exercise the power which 
now is in thee, so will it flow through thee in ever 
greater fullness and glory. 


The Bishop vests each new Deacon with a dalmatic, 
saying: 

The Lord clothe thee with the vesture of gladness 
and ever encompass thee with the dalmatic of jus- 
tice. In the Name of the + Father, and of the 
-+ Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The Bishop delivers to each new Deacon the Book 
of Gospels, saying - 

Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the 
Church of God, both for the living and the dead. 
In the Name of the + Father, and of the + Son, 
and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


He rises, and blesses them in this wise: 


O Christ, the Lord of Love, Who, by the heavenly 
and earthly service of Angels which Thou orderest, 
dost shed over all the elements the efficacy of Thy 
will, pour out on these Thy servants of the fullness of 
Thy + blessing, that in the fellowship of those 
glorious Angels they may minister worthily at Thy 








336 ORDINATION OF DEACONS 





holy Altars, and being endowed with heavenly virtue 
and grace they may ever be watchful and zealous in 
the service of Thy Church, Thou Who reignest for 
ever and ever. R. Amen. 


One of the newly ordained Deacons reads the Gospel. 


THE GOSPEL 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fifteenth chapter 
of that according to St. Luke, beginning at the third 
verse. 


And He spake this parable unto them, saying: 
What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he 
lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine 
in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, 
until he find it? And when he hath found it, he 
layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he 
cometh home, he calleth together his friends and 
neighbours, saying unto them: Rejoice with me, 
for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say 
unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over 
one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety 
and nine just persons, which need no repentance. 


The Holy Eucharist is then continued to its close. 





IN THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION 


In the Prayer of Consecration the following clause 
is inserted after the words: “‘for all our Bishops, clergy 
and fatthful’’: 


Especially for these whom in Christ’s holy Name 
we have admitted to the Order of the Diaconate. 


THE ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 


eS 


The Bishop celebrates the Holy Eucharist, at which 
the following special Collect and Epistle are used: 


THE COLLECT 


Almighty, everlasting God, by Whose Spirit the 
whole body of the Church is made holy and govern- 
ed, do Thou pour forth Thy sanctifying grace into 
the hearts of these Thy Servants, who are about to 
be numbered among the Priests of Thy Church, that 
with pure heart and open mind they may faithfully 
receive Thy blessing from on high. Through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Collect of the Day and the Collect for Peace fol- 
low here. 


THE EPISTLE 


The Epistle is taken from the fifth chapter of 
the First Epistle General of St. Peter, beginning at the 
first verse. 


The elders which are among you I exhort, who am 
also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of 
Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall 
be revealed: Feed the flock of God which is among 
you, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, 
but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready 
mind; neither as being lords over God’s heritage, but 
being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief 
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of 
glory that fadeth not away. The God of all grace, 
Who hath called us unto His eternal glory by Christ 
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you 
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To Him 
be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen, 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


338 ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 


The Gradual being ended, the Bishop takes his seat 
upon a faldstool before the Altar. The ordinands come 
forward bearing lighted candles, and a Priest appointed ~ 
for the purpose presents them to the Bishop, saying: 


Right Reverend Father, our holy Mother the 
Church catholic prays that you would ordain these 
Deacons here present to the charge of the Priest- 
hood. 


Bishop. Knowest thou them to be worthy ? 


Pp, As far as human frailty allows me to judge, 
I do both know and attest that they are worthy of 
the charge of this office. 


B. Thanks be to God. 


The ordinands are then seated, and the Bishop charges 
the clergy and people as follows: : 


Dearly beloved brethren, as both the captain of a 
ship and the passengers it carries have equal cause 
for security or for fear, it behoves them whose in- 
terests are common to be of one mind. Nor was it 
without purpose that the Fathers decreed that the 
people also should be consulted touching the election 
of those who are to be employed in the service of 
the Altar, for what is unknown of the many con- 
cerning the life and conversation of those who are 
presented, may oft-times be known to a few, and 
all will necessarily yield a more ready obedience to 
one when ordained, to whose ordination they have 
signified their assent. If, then, any one has aught 
to the prejudice of these men, in the Name of God 
and for the benefit of His Church, let him boldly 
come forward and speak; howbeit, let him be mind- 
ful of his own estate. : 


After a pause, the Bishop, addressing himself to the 
ordinands, charges them as follows: 


Dearly beloved sons, it is now our part solemnly 
and for the last time, before the irrevocable act shall 
be accomplished which shall lay upon you the sweet 





ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 339 


but heavy burden of the Priesthood, to charge you 
\how great is the dignity and responsibility of this 
office and how weighty are the duties to be performed 
by those ordained thereto. It appertains to the 
Priest to offer sacrifice, to bless, to preside, to loose 
and to bind, to anoint, to preach and to baptize. 
Wherefore, dearly beloved sons, whom the award 
of our brethren has chosen that you may be conse- 
crated to this office as our helpers, after solemn pre- 
meditation only and with great awe is so sublime an 
office to be approached, and great indeed must be the 
care with which we determine that they who are 
chosen to represent our Blessed Lord and to preside 
in His Church commend themselves by great wisdom, 
by worthiness of life and the persevering practice of 
justice and truth. Do you, then, dearly beloved 
sons, keep these things in remembrance and let the 
fruit thereof be seen in your walk and conversa- 
tion, in chaste and holy integrity of life, in con- 
tinually abounding in all manner of good works. 
Strive without ceasing to increase within yourselves 
the perfection of heavenly love, that having your 
hearts filled with the love of God and of man, you 
may be almoners of Christ’s blessing and bearers of 
His love to the hearts of mankind. Forget never how 
great a privilege is yours to bring the little ones to 
Him through the gateway of baptism and to lift 
the heavy burden of the sorrow and sin of the world 
by the grace of absolution. Consider attentively 
what you do, imitate those things which in the 
Church of God it is your duty to handle and to 
transact. And forasmuch as you will now be called 
upon to offer the Holy Sacrifice before the throne 
of God, and to celebrate the sacred mysteries of the 
Lord’s love, be earnest in ridding your members 
of all imperfections. Ye whose duty it is to offer 
unto God the sweet incense of prayer and adoration, 
let your teaching be a spiritual remedy unto God’s 
people; let your words of blessing and consolation 
be their help and strength; let the sweet savour of 
your life be a fragance in the Church of God, 


* 


340 ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 





Thus both by word and deed may you fashion the 
temple of God, so that neither shall we appear blame- 
worthy before the Lord, who in His Name shall thus 
advance you, nor ye who shall thus be advanced; but 
rather may we all find acceptance and abundant recom- 
pense for this day’s act, which of His infinite good- 
ness and lovingkindness may He deign to grant. 


The ordinands rise. 


B. Will you thus strive to use worthily the powers 
entrusted to you ? 


Ordinands. I will. 


B. The Lord keep you in all these things, well- 
beloved sons, and strengthen you in all goodness. 
R. Amen. 


The Bishop rises and addresses the people as follows: 


Let us pray, dearest brethren, that Almighty God, 
in His great lovingkindness and watchful care over 
His Church, may bestow a plentiful grace on these 
Deacons, now about to be raised to the Order of the 
Priesthood. 


LITANY 


Should the Diaconate have been conferred during this 
same service, this Litany will already have been sung, 
and will not therefore be repeated. 





All kneel and sing the following Litany, during which 
the ordinands lie prostrate. 





God the Father, seen of none, 

God the co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit, with Them One, 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 





ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 341 


God Eternal, mighty King, 

Unto Thee our love we bring; 

Through the world Thy praises ring; 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


Christ, the Lord of Life and Light, 
Ruler of the starry height, 
Fount of glory infinite, 

Thee we worship, Master. 


Mighty Lord, we hail Thee here, 

Recognize Thy Presence dear, 

Feel and know that Thou art near, 
Keeping thus Thy promise. 


Though Thy Face we cannot see 

As of old in Galilee, 

Strong in faith we worship Thee, | 
Ever-present Master. 


From our fathers we have heard 
Of the gift Thy Hand conferred; 
We have proved Thy holy word; 

Be that gift outpoured. 


Though Thy form from earth hath gone, 
Thine Apostles handed on 
Sacramental benison; 

Be that blessing with us. 


' We this power would now convey, 

Strengthen Thou our hands, we pray, 

Pour Thy might through us to-day, 
Hear us, Holy Master, 


Monarch, at Thy Feet we kneel, 

For Thy servants we appeal, 

Fill their Hearts with holy zeal, 
In Thy service, Master. 


342 ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 


Thou of holy Church the Head, 

Mystic power upon them shed, 

By Thy love may they be led; 
Hear us, Holy Master. 


Link in mystic bond with Thee 
These Thy Priests that they may be 
From the world and self set free, 

By Thy power, O Master. 


May they stand before Thy Face 
Filled with love and heavenly grace; 
Grant them with Thy saints a place 

Near Thee, Lord and Master. 


The three verses which follow are sung by the Bishop 
only : 


We beseech Thee, hear our prayer; 
Bless + Thy servants prostrate there; . 
Hold them in Thy loving care; 

Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Hear Thy servants as they pray; 

Help Thy chosen Priests to-day. 

Bless + and + hallow them for aye; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Pour Thy lovingkindness great 

On each chosen candidate; 

Bless + them, + hallow, + consecrate, 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


The following verse is sung by all: 


God the Father, seen of none, 
God the co-eternal Son, 
God the Spirit, with Them One, 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


After the Litany the people are seated. The Bishop 
rises and, with hands extended towards the ordinands, 
who kneel before him, says the following prayer: 





ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 343 


O Lord Christ, the Fountain of all goodness, Who 
by the operation of the Holy Spirit hast appointed 
divers Orders in Thy Church, and for its greater 
enrichment and perfecting dost shed Thy gifts 
abundantly upon men, do Thou pour forth Thy sanc- 
tifying grace upon these Thy servants, who are about 
to be numbered among the Priests of Thy Church. 
May their hands be strong to achieve, may wisdom 
guide and direct their lives, may the beauty of holi- 
ness sanctify them and shed a spiritual fragrance 
about their path, so that in all their works begun, 
continued and ended in Thee, they may show forth 
the abundance of Thy power and glorify Thy holy 
Name, O Thou great King of Love, to Whom be 
praise and adoration from men and from the Angel 
host. BR. Amen. 


In silence the Bishop lays both hands on the head of 
each ordinand. The same is done after him successive- 
ly by all the Priests present. When this is over, both 
the Bishop and the Priests having their right hands ea- 
tended towards the ordinands, the Bishop says the follow- 
ing: 

O Lord Christ, Whose strength is in the silence, 
grant that these Thy servants whom now Thou dost 
join unto Thyself in the holy bond of the Priesthood 
may henceforward minister faithfully of the priestly 
power to those who ask in Thy Name. R. Amen. 


B. Let us pray, dearest brethren, that Almighty 
God may multiply the gifts of the Spirit in these His ~ 
servants for the work of the Priesthood. 


They lower their hands, and all kneel while the 
Veni Creator is sung: 


VENI CREATOR 


Come, Thou Creator Spirit blest, 

And in our souls take up Thy rest; 
Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid, 
To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. 


344 


ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 


Great Paraclete, to Thee we cry, 

O highest gift of God most high; 
O living Fount, O Fire, O Love, 
And sweet anointing from above. 


Thou in Thy sevenfold gifts art known; 
Thee, Finger of God’s Hand, we own, 
The promise of the Father, Thou 

Who dost the tongue with power endow. 


Kindle our senses from above, 

And make our hearts o’erflow with love; 
With patience firm and virtue high 

The weakness of our flesh supply. 


Far let us drive our tempting foe, 
And Thine abiding peace bestow; 
So shall we not, with Thee for guide, 
Turn from the path of life aside. 


O may Thy grace on us bestow 

The Father and the Son to know, 

And Thee, through endless time confessed, 
Of both eternal Spirit blest, 


All glory while the ages run - 

Be to the Father and the Son, 

Who gave us life; the same to Thee, 
O Holy Ghost, eternally. Amen. 


The Bishop rises and again imposes his hands upon 


the 


head of each ordinand, saying to each: 


Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a 
Priest in the Church of God; whose sins thou dost for- 
give, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou dost 
retain, they are retained. 


The Bishop, with his hands extended towards the or- 
dinands, continues: 

O God, the Source of all holiness, of Whom are true 
consecration and the fullness of spiritual benediction, 


ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 345 


we pray Thee, O Lord, to + open to Thy heavenly 
grace the hearts and minds of these Thy servants, 
who have been raised to the Priesthood, that through 
them Thy power may abundantly flew for the service 
of Thy people. May they be earnest and zealous 
as fellow-workers in our Order, and thus prove them- 
selves worthy of the sacred charge committed unto 
them. And, as by a spotless blessing they now 
shall change for the service of Thy people bread and 
wine into the most holy Body and Blood of Thy 
Son, may they be ever watchful that they keep the 
vessel of their ministry pure and undefiled. May 
every kind of righteousness spring forth within them, 
and may their hearts be so filled with compassion 
for the multitude, that they may forget themselves 
in the love of others. Thus steadfast in that Thy 
most joyous service, may the radiance of Thy love 
and Thy glory shine ever more brightly in their 
hearts, till they rise unto mature spiritual manhood, 
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of 
Christ, when their lives shall be hid with Christ in 
God. R. Amen. 


The Bishop is seated, and, taking the stole that 
hangs after the manner of a Deacon, places it on 
the right shoulder and crosses it over the breast of each 
new Priest, saying: 





Take thou this stole, for a symbol of the power 
of the priestly office, and as a channel of the ever- 
flowing stream of Christ’s love. 


He vests each new Priest with the chasuble, saying: 


Take thou the priestly vestment, that in it thou 
mayest offer with our Lord Christ the most holy 
Sacrifice of His sacred Body and Blood. 


The Bishop anoints the hands of each new Priest 
with the holy oil of the catechuwmens, saying: 


Be pleased, O Lord, to consecrate and hallow these 
hands by this anointing and our + blessing; that 


346 ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 


- whatsoever they + bless may be blessed, and what- 
soever they consecrate may be consecrated and hal- 
lowed, in the Name of our Lord Christ. R. Amen. 


The Bishop closes the hands together, palm to 
palm, and they are bound together with a white linen 
strip» The Bishop delivers to each new Priest a 
chalice containing wine and water, with a paten and a 
host upon it, saying: 

Take thou authority to offer sacrifice to God, and 
to celebrate the Holy Eucharist both for the living 
and for the dead. In the Name of the Lord. R. 
Amen, 


The Bishop and the Priests cleanse their hands. The 
Celebration is continued, one of the newly ordained 
Priests going to the Altar and reading the Gospel as 
follows: 

THE GOSPEL 


The holy Gospel is taken from the twentieth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the nine- 
teenth verse, and from the twenty-eighth chapter of that 
according to St. Matthew, beginning at the eighteenth — 
verse. 


The same day at evening, being the first day of the 
week, when the doors were shut where the disciples 
were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and 
stood in the midst, and saith unto them: Peace be 
unto you. Then were the disciples glad, when they 
saw the Lord. Then said Jesus unto them again: 
Peace be unto you; as my Father hath sent me, even 
so send I you. And when He had said this, He 
breathed on them, and saith unto them: Receive 
ye the Holy Ghost. Whosesoever sins ye remit, 
they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins 
ye retain, they are retained. 


Jesus spake unto them, saying: All power is given 
unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore 
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, 


oes ee 


ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 347 





teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I 
have commanded you; and lo, I am with you alway, 
even unto the consummation of the age. 


Just before the Offertorium, the new Priests kneel 
before the Bishop and each presents to him a lighted 
candle as a visible token of gratitude for the gift re- 
cewwed and of the sacrifice of their lives for Christ’s 
work. Thereafter the new Priests recite with the Bishop 
the remainder of the Holy Eucharist, word for word, tak- 
ing particular care to say simultaneously with him the 
Words of Consecration with due intention to consecrate. 





IN THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION. 


In the Prayer of Consecration the following clause is 
added after the words: ‘‘for all our Bishops, clergy 
and faithful’’: 

Especially for these whom in Christ’s holy Name 
we have admitted to the Order of the Priesthood. 





After the sentence, ‘‘Under the veil of earthly things, 
etc.,’’ the Bishop is once more seated on the faldstool; 
the new Priests kneel before him, and placing each his 
joined hands between those of the Bishop, take an oath 
of canonical obedience: 

B. Dost thou promise to myself and my succes- 
sors due reverence and obedience in matters canoni- 
cal ? isan 


New Priest. I do promise. 


If the Bishop who is ordaining be not the Ordinary, 
he substitutes the name of the latter for the word ‘‘my- 
Self,”? and ““his,’” for <“my,’’ 


B. Peace be to thee. 
N:P. And with thy spirit. 


348 ORDINATION OF PRIESTS 


The Bishop charges them thus: 


Dearly beloved sons, as what you have to 
handle is not without its mischances, I warn you that 
you do most diligently attend to the course of the 
Holy Eucharist, and especially to that which regards 
the consecration, the breaking and communion of the 
Host. Be you also careful that in everything which 
appertains to the administration of the Sacraments 
of Christ’s holy Church, you do adhere to the form 
set forth by lawful authority, and presume not to 
depart therefrom in any detail. 


He blesses the new Priests kneeling before him, 
as follows: 2 


The blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the 
+ Son, and the Holy + Ghost, come down upon you, 
that you may be blessed in the priestly Order, and 
in the offering of sacrifice to Almighty God,.to Whom 
belong honour and glory to the ages of ages. R. Amen. 


The Bishop is again seated upon the faldstool, and ad- 
dresses the new Priests as follows: 


Dearly beloved sons, consider attentively the Order 
you have taken and be ever mindful of. the sacred 
trust reposed in you. Since it hath pleased our 
Lord to call you thus closer to Himself, forget not 
the service of your brethren, which is the golden 
pathway to His most glorious Presence. Freely ye 
have received, freely give. 


The Communio is sung, and the Holy Eucharist is 
continued to its close. 





THE CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 





At the conclusion of the Asperges the Consecrator 
takes his seat upon the faldstool, the assistant Bishops 
and Bishop Elect rise, and, taking the hand of the lat- 
ter, the senior assistant Bishop addresses the Consecrator 
in these words: 

Most Reverend Father, our holy Mother the Church 
catholic prays that you would raise this Priest here 
present to the charge of the Episcopate. 


Consecrator. Knowest thou him to be worthy ? 


S.4.B. As far as human frailty allows me to judge, 
I do both know and attest that he is worthy of the 
charge of this office. 


Con. Thanks be to God. 


The Consecrator continues: Have you the protocol 
of election 7 

S.A.B. We have. 

Con. Let it be read. 

All sit and the protocol is read. This being done the 
Bishop Elect kneels before the faldstool, puts his hands 
together between those of the Consecrator, and says: 


Bishop Elect. In the Name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. I, N., chosen 
Bishop of the Church, do promise all due reverence 
and obedience in matters canonical to the Presiding 
Bishop and to his successors, So help me God, 
through Christ our Lord. 

The Consecrator pressing his hands lightly says: 

The peace of the Lord be always with thee. 

B-H, Amen. 


Con. The order established of old by the 
Fathers teaches and commands that whoso is elected 
to the Episcopal Order shall be beforehand diligent- 
ly examined in all charity concerning the doctrine of 


350 CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 





the Holy Trinity, and the divers relations and vir- 
tues suitable to this charge; and it is seemly that 
this practice be maintained. For since we verily 
believe that this stewardship has been committed 
unto us by Christ Himself, it behoves us to assure 
ourselves that they to whom we in turn commit it 
shall know, and in their hearts be fully persuaded, 
how great is their responsibility before Him. In 
His Name, therefore, and in virtue of this authority 
and commandment, we now ask of thee, well-beloved 
brother, in sincere charity, whether if thou be or- 
dained to this sacred charge, thou wilt exercise its 
powers wholly for what seemeth unto thee the true 
benefit of Christ’s holy catholic Church, and for no 
other purpose whatsoever, laying aside utterly all 
thought of personal predilection or advancement. 


B.E, With my whole heart I will en- 
deavour so to do. 


Con. Wilt thou, so far as in thee lies, set thy 
affection on things above and not on things of 
earth ? 


B.E. TI will. 


Con. Wilt thou with God’s help ever remember — 
that in this high office to which thou art called it is 
thy bounden duty, and should be thy constant care, to 
show an example of godly life to all those given into 
thy charge ? 


BE. TI will. 


Con. Wilt thou ever cherish as a sacred trust the - 
power now to be committed unto Thee, and solemnly 
pledge thyself to exercise all care and discretion in | 
the choice of those upon whom in Christ’s Name thou 
shalt bestow the gift of Holy Orders ? 


BiH ser), 


Con. Wilt thou hold thyself ever ready to do ser- 
vice in Christ’s Name to all men, so far as thou art | 


CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 351 


able, remembering that the noblest title of a Bishop 
_is ‘‘Servant of the servants of God’’ ? 


B.E. I will. 


Con. Wilt thou, for the sake of the Lord’s Name, 
seek ever to be gentle and tender to the sorrowful 
and those who suffer want ? 


BE, I will. 


Con. Wilt thou ever bethink thee that thou shouldst 
be a father unto thy people, and most of all show 
love unto the little ones among thy flock; remem- 
bering how Christ spake: ‘‘Suffer the little children 
to come unto Me, and forbid them not, for of such is 
the kingdom of God’’? 


BE. TI will. 


Con. The Lord keep thee in these things, well- 
beloved brother, and strengthen thee in all goodness. 
R. Amen. 


The Consecrator continues: 


Dost thou believe, according to the measure of thy 
understanding and the powers of thy mind, in the 
Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, from 
Whom, by Whom, and in Whom are all things in 
heaven and earth, visible and invisible, bodily and 
spiritual ? 


B.E. I do. 


Con. The Lord increase this faith in thee, well- 
beloved brother in Christ, that thou mayest lead thy 
flock to a knowledge of the Divine Wisdom. 

R. Amen, 


The Consecrator and the Bishop Elect each assume 
the Hucharistic vestments. The Consecrator faces 
the Altar and begins the Holy Eucharist. After the 
Absolution, pronounced by the Consecrator, the Bishop 
lect, escorted by the assistant Bishops and their sever- 


352 CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 


al attendants, proceeds to the side Altar. The Conse- 
crator and the Bishop Elect both say the Eucharist in 
the customary manner up to the end of the Gradual, the — 
following Collect and Epistle being used: 


THE COLLECT 


Almighty everlasting God, by Whose Spirit the 
whole body of the Church is made holy and govern- 
ed, do Thou pour forth Thy sanctifying grace into 
the heart of this Thy servant who is about to be 
numbered among the shepherds and rulers of Thy 
Church, that with pure heart and open mind he may 
faithfully receive of the plenitude of the Spirit. 
Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Collect of the Day and the Collect for Peace fol- 
low here. 


THE EPISTLE 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the second chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, beginning at the first verse. 


When the day of Pentecost was fully come, they 
were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly 
there came a sound from heaven, as ot a rusning 
mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they 
were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven 
tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them: 
and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and 
began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave — 
them utterance. And there were dwelling at Jeru- 
salem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under — 
heaven. Now when this was noised abroad, the 
multitude came together, and were confounded, be- 
cause that every man heard them speak in his own 
language. And they were all amazed, and marvel- 
led, saying one to another: Behold, are not all these — 
which speak Galileans? And how hear we every | 
man in our own tongue wherein we were born? Par-— 
thians and Medes and Elamites, and the dwellers in : 


CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 353 


Mesopotamia, and in Judea and Cappadocia, in Pon- 
tus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and 
in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers 
of Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, 
we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonder- 
ful works of God. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 


The Gradual being finished, the Bishop Elect is es- 
corted by the assistant Bishops to the Consecrator, who 
from the faldstool thus addresses him: 


It appertains to a Bishop to consecrate, to ordain, 
to offer sacrifice, to anoint, to bless, to loose and to 
bind, to baptize and to confirm, to preside, to in- 
terpret and to judge. 


Rising, he continues: 


Let us then pray, dearest brethren, that Almighty 
God, in His great lovingkindness and watchful care 
over His Church, may bestow upon this Bishop Elect 
a plentiful grace for the performance of this sacred 
ministry. R. Amen, 


All kneel and sing the following Litany, during which 
the Bishop Elect lies prostrate: 


LITANY 


God the Father, seen of none, 

God the co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit, with Them One, 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


God Eternal, mighty King, 

Unto Thee our love we bring; 

Through the world Thy praises ring; 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


Christ, the Lord of Life and Light, 
Ruler of the starry height, 
Fount of glory infinite, 

Thee we worship, Master. 


354 


CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 


Mighty Lord, we hail Thee here, 

Recognize Thy Presence dear, 

Feel and know that Thou art near, 
Keeping thus Thy promise. 


Though Thy Face we cannot see 

As of old in Galilee, 

Strong in faith we worship Thee, 
Ever-present Master. 


From our fathers we have heard 
Of the gift Thy Hand conferred; 
We have proved Thy holy word; 


Be that gift outpoured. 


Though Thy form from earth hath gone, 
Thine Apostles handed on 
Sacramental benison; 

Be that blessing with us. 


We this power would now convey; 

Strengthen Thou our hands, we pray, 

Pour Thy might through us to-day; 
Hear us, Holy Master. 


Monarch, at Thy Feet we kneel, 
For Thy servant we appeal, 
Fill his heart with holy zeal, 

In Thy service, Master. 


Thou of holy Church the Head, 

Mystic power upon him shed, 

By Thy love may he be led; 
Hear us, Holy Master. 


Link in mystic bond with Thee, 
This Thy Bishop, that he be 
From the world and self set free 
By Thy power, O Master. 


May he stand before Thy Face 
Filled with love and heavenly grace; 
Grant him with Thy saints a place 

Near Thee, Lord and Master. 


CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 355 


Just before this the Consecrator rises, receives the staff 
_ and turns towards the prostrate Bishop Elect. The as- 
- sistant Bishops do likewise. Together they chant these 
three verses, blessing him at the appointed places: 


We beseech Thee, hear our prayer; 
Bless + Thy servant, prostrate there; 
Hold him in Thy loving care; 

Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Hear Thy servants as they pray; 

Help Thy chosen one to-day, 

Bless + and + hallow him for aye; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 

Pour Thy lovingkindness great 

On Thy chosen candidate; 

Bless + him, + hallow, + consecrate; 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


The Bishops kneel, and the following verse is suny 


God the Father, seen of none, 
God the Co-eternal Son, 
God the Spirit, with Them One, 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


At the conclusion of the Litany the people are seated. 
Henceforward in all parts of the ceremony additional 
to the usual course of the Holy Eucharist, the assistant 
Bishops repeat all that is said by the Consecrator, mak- 
ing also the various signs over the Bishop Elect with him. 
One of the clergy holds an open book of the Gospels over 
the neck and shoulders of the Bishop Elect, who kneels 
while the Consecrator, with hands extended over him, re- 
cites the following prayer: 

O Lord Christ, the Fountain of all goodness, Who by 
the operation of the Holy Spirit hast appointed 
divers Orders in Thy Church, and for its greater 
enrichment and perfecting dost pour down Thy gifts 
abundantly upon men, making some to excel in wis- 
dom, others in devotion and yet others to be well. 
skilled in action, pour down upon this Thy servant of 
the fullness of the Holy Ghost, that in the pontifical 


M2 





fen 


356 GONSEGRATION OF A BISHOP 


dignity to which we are about to raise him he may 
shine resplendent with all manner of heavenly virtue, 
O Thou great Shepherd and Bishop of the souls of 
men, to Whom be praise and adoration from men and 
from the Angel host. R. Amen. 


All kneel as the Veni Creator is sung: 
VENI CREATOR 


Come, Thou Creator Spirit blest, 

And in our souls take up Thy rest; 

Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid, 
To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. 


Great Paraclete, to Thee we cry, 
O highest gift of God most high; 
O living Fount, O Fire, O Love, 
And sweet anointing from above. 


Thou in Thy sevenfold gifts art known; 
Thee, Finger of God’s Hand, we own, 
The promise of the Father, Thou 

Who dost the tongue with power endow. 


Kindle our senses from above, 

And make our hearts o’erflow with love; 
With patience firm and virtue high 
The weakness of our flesh supply. 


Far let us drive our tempting foe, 
And Thine abiding peace bestow; 
So shall we not, with Thee for guide, 
Turn from the path of life aside. 


O may Thy grace on us bestow 

The Father and the Son to know, 

And Thee, through endless time confessed, 
Of both eternal Spirit blest. - 


All glory while the ages run 

Be to the Father and the Son, 

Who gave us life; the same to Thee, 
O Holy Ghost, eternally. Amen. 


CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 357 


The people remain kneeling. The Consecrator and 
the assistant Bishops rise; they lay both hands upon 
the head of the Bishop Elect, and together say slowly 
and distinctly the words of consecration: 


Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a 
Bishop in the Church of God. 


After a pause, with hands extended over the 
new Bishop, the Consecrator continues with the following 
prayer, the assistant Bishops likewise extending their 
hands, and, as already indicated, accompanying him in 
a low voice: 

O God the Father, God the Son, and God the 
Holy Ghost, most blessed and adorable Trinity, Who 
wert and art and art to come, as Thou hast now be- 
stowed upon this Thy servant of Thine awful power, 
and hast deigned to consecrate him as Thy represen- 
tative and a teacher of Thy people, + open, we pray 
Thee, his heart and mind to Thy heavenly grace, that 
he may handle wisely that which he has received and, 
being ever mindful of Thee, he may exercise his sac- 
red power to the honour and glory of Thy holy Name. 
Fulfil in Thy chosen Bishop the perfection of Thy ser- 
vice, and, having entrusted him with the supreme 
dignity, do Thou sanctify him with unction from 
above. 

The head of the newly-made Bishop is then bound 
with a long napkin and the Consecrator anoints him 
with Holy Chrism in token of his authority and dignity 


| as a@ prince of the Church, saying to him: 





| May thy head be anointed and consecrated 
| with heavenly blessing in the pontifical Order, so that 
the power which thou dost receive from on high may 
flow forth from thee in ever greater abundance and 
glory. In the Name of the + Father, and of the + 
/Son, and of the Holy + Ghost.  R. Amen, 


The Consecrator, again extending his hands, says: 


| Thou Who art Wisdom, Strength and Beauty, show 
forth Thy glory in this Thy servant. Let Thy wis- 
dom dwell in his mind and enlighten his understand- 


358 CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 


ing, that in judgment he may be true, and a wise 
counsellor unto his people, discerning in all spirit- 
ual knowledge. May he be strong and of a 
good courage, sustaining his people in the face of 
darkness and despondency, a tower of strength to 
them that falter on the way. Let the beauty of 
holiness shine forth in his conversation and his ac- 
tions. Do Thou fill him, O Lord, with reverence, 
and make him devout and steadfast in Thy service. 
May gentleness adorn his life, that he may win the 
hearts of men and open them to the light of the Holy 
Spirit. Above all, may he be so filled with Thy 
love that he may touch the hearts of men with the 
fire from heaven and bring them from the darkness 
of ignorance into Thy marvellous Light: Thou Who 
livest and reignest, O Trinity of Might and Wisdom 
and Love, one holy God throughout all ages of ages. 
R. Amen. 


The Consecrator, being seated, anoints the hands of 
the new Bishop with the Holy Chrism. He says: 


May these hands be consecrated and hallowed for 
the work of the pontifical Order by this anointing 
with the holy chrism of sanctification. In the Name 
of the + Father, and of the + Son, and of the Holy 
+ Ghost. R. Amen. 


He makes the sign of the cross first over the heart of 
the newly consecrated Bishop, and then over his hands, 
saying : 


Mayest thou abound with the fullness of spir- 
itual + blessing, so that whatsoever thou dost + 
bless may be blessed, and whatsoever thou dost hal- 
low may be hallowed, and that the laying on of 
this consecrated hand may avail for the spiritual 
safeguarding of Thy people: in the Name of our Lord 
Christ. BR. Amen. 


He joins the consecrated hands and binds them with | 
a linen strip. Having cleansed his hands, he proceeds | 








CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 359 


to bless the pastoral staff, pectoral cross and ring. Tak- 
ing the staff in his hands, he says: 


Eternal Triune God, before Whose great white 
throne seven flaming Spirits stand, Whom yet Thou 
dost send forth through all the world, + pour out 
upon this staff Thy sevenfold fire, that it may be a 
rod of power for the ruling and Strengthening of 
Thy Church. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


Holding the cross between his hands, he says: 


Almighty God, Who of Thine own most holy will 
didst offer Thyself as a Sacrifice for all the world, and 
hast by that limitation of Thyself hallowed the sign 
of the cross and made it for ever Thine own, let 
the seven Rays of Thine ineffable glory + shine 
through this sacred symbol, that this holy cross may 
ever be a radiant sun to him who weareth it, and a 
fount of light and benison to all Thy faithful people, 
O Thou Who reignest from the cross for ever. R. 
Amen, 

He holds the ring between his joimed hands, and says: 


O Christ, pure Lord of Love, Whom Angel hosts 
obey, touch Thou with sacred fire this ring which in 
Thy Name we + bless, that he who wears it shall 
ever show Thy love and purity, and all who touch 
it shall know Thy healing grace. R. Amen, 


The new Bishop’s hands are unbound, the napkin is 
removed from his head, and he cleanses his hands. The 
Consecrator presents the staff to the new Bishop, say- 
ing: 

Receive this staff, and wield thy power with care 
as shepherd of Christ’s flock, By virtue of the 
sevenfold fire of God the Holy Ghost be thou all 
things to all men; giving more strength unto the 
“Strong, yet showing gentleness unto the weak; full 
of wisdom for the wise, and for the devout full of 
deep devotion. Yet as the seven flashing colours 
of the bow make but one pure white ray, so shall thy 
sevenfold power be all the one great power of love. 


360 CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 


The new Bishop hands his crosier to his crosier 
bearer. The Consecrator suspends the cross round the 
neck of the new Bishop, saying: 


Receive this cross, remembering that only by the 
perfect sacrifice of the lower nature to the higher 
canst thou fit thyself to bear it worthily. Go forth 
in the power of the cross, and may the sevenfold 
light of the Holy Spirit so shine through thee that 
thou mayest win others to the beauty of sacrifice. 


He places the ring on the ring-finger of the right 
hand of the newly-made Bishop, saying: 


Receive this ring in token of the link which binds 
thee to our Lord, for symbol of thine office as His 
legate to thy people. In His most holy Name, be 
thou a healer of the souls of men, a channel of His 
love. 


Delivering to him the Book of Gospels, closed, which 
had previously been held on his shoulders, he says: 


Receive the Book of the Gospels, and be thou a 
teacher of the Divine Wisdom unto the people en- 
trusted to thee. 


The Consecrator, and after him the assistant Bishops, 
give the salutation of peace to the newly-consecrated 
Bishop, saying: 


Peace be unto thee. 


Newly-Consecrated Bishop. And with thy spirit. 


The new Bishop, accompanied by the assistant 
Bishops and their several attendants, withdraws to the 
side Altar. The Consecrator resumes the Celebration, 
the special Gospel which follows being used: 


THE GOSPEL 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourteenth chapter | 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the fifteenth | 
verse. | 








CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 361 


JESUS said unto His disciples: Tf will pray the 
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, 
that He may abide With you for ever; even the Spirit 
of Truth, Whom the world, cannot receive, because 
it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him; but ye know 
Him; for He dwelleth with you, and shall be 
in you. I will not leave you comfortless; I will 
come to you. Yet a little while, and the world seeth 
Me no more; but ye see Me; because I live, ye shall 
live also. The Comforter, Which is the Holy Ghost, 
Whom the Father will send in My Name, He shall 
teach you all things, and bring all things to your 
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. 
Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: 
not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not 
your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. 


THE OFFERING 


After the Credo and immediately before the Offer- 
tortum is read, the new Bishop presents his offerings to 
the Consecrator. According to ancient custom these 
consist of two small loaves of bread, two torches or 
candles, and two miniature barrels of wine. The 
loaves and barrels are emblazoned with the arms of the 
Consecrator on a golden shield, and those of the new 
Bishop upon a silver shield, The newly-consecrated 
Bishop, accompanied by his assistant Bishops, then pro- 
ceeds to the south end of the high Altar and says aloud 
the remainder of the office of the Holy Eucharist with 
the Consecrator word for word. 





IN THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION 
In the prayer of Consecration the following clause is 
added after the words: “*for all our Bishops, clergy 
and fatthful’’: 
Especially for him, whom in Christ’s holy Name 
‘we have admitted to the Order of the Episcopate. 


After the final blessing the Consecrator and the new 
Bishop assume the cope. Ihe Consecrator proceeds 


! 
362 CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 


to the faldstool. The mitre and gloves of the new Bishop 
are held before the Consecrator and he blesses them. The 
three Bishops place the mitre on the head of the newly- 
consecrated Bishop, the Consecrator saying: 


Receive this mitre, wherewith I crown thee 
for the service of that our most dear Lord, Who, 
although He be God and man, yet He is not two, 
but one Christ; and as in Himself He doth indis- 
solubly unite two natures, so mayest thou in thyself 
for ever join the attributes of wisdom and of love. 


The Consecrator, with the aid of the assistant Bishops, 
puts the gloves on the hands of the New Bishop. 
This being accomplished, the Consecrator rises and says: 


Do Thou, we pray Thee, O Lord, fulfil in Thy ser- 
vant that which is betokened by these visible em- 
plems, so that the virtue which in these garments 
is prefigured by sheen of gold, by flashing of gems 
and cunning of varied embroidery, may continually 
shine forth in his life and actions. BR. Amen. 


The new Bishop is solemnly enthroned. iewre 
Deum Laudamus is sung, during which the newly- 
consecrated: Bishop, attended by the assistant Bishops, 
proceeds around the Church and gives his blessing to 
the people. 


TE DEUM LAUDAMUS 
Antiphon 
The light of the Lord leadeth him: 


Who giveth wisdom to the godly. 
1. We praise Thee, O God: we acknowledge Thee to 
be the Lord. 


2. All the earth doth worship Thee: the Father ev- 
erlasting. 


3. To Thee all Angels sing aloud: the heavens and 
all the powers therein. 





CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 363 


4. To Thee Cherubim and Seraphim: continually do 
cry, 

5. Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Hosts. 

6. Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of 
Thy glory. 

7. The glorious company of the apostles: praise Thee, 

8. The goodly fellowship of the prophets: praise 
Thee, 

9. The noble army of martyrs: praise Thee. 


10, The holy Church throughout all the world: doth 
acknowledge Thee, : 


11. The Father: of an infinite majesty. 

12. Thine honourable, true; and only Son. 

13. Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter, 

14. Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ. 

15. Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father. 


16. Thou sittest at the right hand of God: in the 
glory of the Father, 


17. Thou art Alpha and Omega: Thou first and last 
of all. 


18. Offspring and root of David: Thou bright and 
morning Star. 


19. Day by day: we magnify Thee, 


20. And we worship Thy Name: ever world with- 
out end. 


21. Thou Who from Both dost come: O God the 
Holy Ghost, 


22. Thee, too, O Paraclete: we worship and adore. 


23. Thou art the Fount of Life: the living Fire of 
love, 


24. Three in One: most holy Lord. and God. 


25. Co-equal, co-eternal: before beginning and Wwith- 
out an end. 


26. We Thy servants live in Thee: and all we have 
is Thine. 


364 CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 


27. We bless Thee, we magnify Thee: most joyously 
we serve Thee. Z 

28. O mighty, glorious Trinity: let all the people 
praise Thee. 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the 
Holy Ghost, 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon 
The light of the Lord leadeth him: 
Who giveth wisdom to the godly. 


When the procession returns to the sanctuary, the 
new Bishop is seated on the throne or faldstool, the 
Consecrator standing upon his right hand, and the as- 
sistant Bishops upon his left. The Consecrator turns 
to the people and says: 


The Lord be with you. 
People. And with thy spirit. 
Con. Let us pray. 


O God, the Shepherd and Ruler of all the faithful, 
look down in Thy lovingkindness on this servant of 
Thine, who has now become a pontiff and ruler in 
Thy Church; grant him, we pray Thee, O Lord, both 
by his ministration and by word and example, so 
to profit those over whom he is placed that, together 
with the flock committed to his care, he may continu- 
ally increase in the knowledge of Thy mysteries. - 
Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Consecrator and the assistant Bishops, one on 
either side of him, stand at the gospel side of the 
sanctuary. The new Bishop advances to the middle of the 
Altar and thence gives his solemn benediction as follows: 


Bishop. Blessed be the Name of the Lord. 
People. From this time forth for evermore. 
B. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 





CONSECRATION OF A BISHOP 365 


P. Who hath made heaven and earth. 


B. (turning to the people). The peace of God, 
which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts 
and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of 
His Son, Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God 
Almighty, the + Father, the 4 Son, and the Holy 
+ Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you 
always. R. Amen. 


THE HOMAGE 


The newly-consecrated Bishop then pays homage to 
the Consecrator according to the ancient tradition of 
the Church. He advances by three stages from the 
epistle side of the sanctuary towards the Consecrator, 
genuflecting each time and saying: ‘Ad Multos Annos’? 
(‘‘unto many years’’), finally receiving from the Con- 
secrator the salutation of peace. This concluded, the 
procession leaves the chancel. 


A FORM OF ADMISSION 
TO THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC CHURCH 


To be used when conditional re-baptism or Confirma- 
tion is not administered. 





© 


The Priest stands at the entrance to the sanctuary, 
the candidate standing before him. 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, 44 and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


Candidate. Reverend Father, I desire to be ad- 
mitted into the fellowship of the Liberal Catholic 
Church. 

P. Wilt thou strive to live in the spirit of love 
with all mankind, and manfully to fight against sin 
and. selfishness ? 


Can. I will. 

P. Wilt thou strive to show forth in thy thoughts, 
thy words and thy works, the power of God which 
is in thee ? 

Can, I will. 

P. The Lord keep thee in all these things and 
strengthen thee in all goodness. 


P. Let us pray. 
The candidate kneels. 


*P, O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive 
and to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy 
children, look down, we pray Thee, upon this Thy ser. — 
vant whom we now admit to our fellowship. Sanc- 
tify + him, O Lord, with Thy heavenly grace, that, 





*This prayer may be used in connection with any 
who are admitted to the Church by Confirmation or by 
conditional re-baptism. 








A FORM OF ADMISSION 367 
a or ee ed 


growing continually in virtue, he may serve before 
Thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of his 
life, and thus may be found worthy to obtain the 
riches and the never-fading. glory of Thy kingdom, 
O Thou great Master of the hearts of men, to Whom 
be praise and adoration for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Priest lays his hand upon the head of the 
new member, raising it only to make the sign of the 
cross, and says: 


P. The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, + 
the Son, and the Holy Ghost rest upon thee, that thou 
mayest faithfully serve before Him all the days of 
thy life. R. Amen. 


THE ADMISSION OF A SINGER 





The Priest stands at the foot of the Altar steps, 
the candidate standing before him. 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, 44 and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


P. Since you are now to be admitted as a Singer 
in Christ’s holy Church, let me exhort you to be 
mindful of the duties of your office. It is impera- 
tive, as you doubtless understand, that you should 
be punctual and regular in your attendance 
at Church, and not lightly excuse yourself from your 
duties. Also that you should work in the spirit of 
co-operation with your fellow-members of the choir, 
showing unfailing courtesy, patience and tact. But 
above all, both in the Church and out of it, remem- 
ber the sacredness of speech. Man is endowed with 
many faculties, and all of them should be used in the 
service of God. From time immemorial, however, 
the voice has been regarded as the especial instru- 
ment for rendering praise and glory to Almighty 
God. It is indeed very meet, right, and our bounden 
duty that we, in company with the angelic host, should 
give thanks unto Him Whose Name is holy and Who 
filleth the whole earth with His majesty and glory. 
And as you come before Him with a song upon your 
lips, see to it that you also make melody in your 
heart, joining in the great song of life which is 
the ceaseless hymn of all creation. Let your work, 
then, be done in the spirit of service, not with vain- 
gloriousness and pride of self, but rather in single- 
ness of heart. So shall the blessing of the Christ 
rest upon you, and inspire both your voice and your 
heart. 


The candidate now kneels before the Priest. 


P Wilt thou strive earnestly to practise these 
duties ? 


Candidate. I will. 








ADMISSION OF A SINGER 369 


P. The Lord keep thee in all these things, well-be- 


_ loved son, and strengthen thee in all goodness. R. 


Amen, 


The Priest says the following prayer with hands ea- 
tended towards the candidate: 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy chil- 
dren, look down in Thy love upon this Thy servant 
who desires to minister as a Singer in Thy holy 
Church. Sanctify + him, O Lord, with Thy heaven- 
ly grace, and so fill his heart with heavenly music 
that his life may resound with Thy praise. R. Amen. 


The Priest lays his hand upon the candidate’s 
head, raising it only to make the sign of the cross, and 
says: 

The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, + the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost, come down upon thee, that 
thou mayest rightly fulfil that which to-day thou hast 
undertaken. R. Amen, 


THE ADMISSION OF A SERVER 


The Priest stands at the foot of the Altar steps, the 
candidate standing before him. 


Priest. In the Name of the Father, a and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


P. You should understand that in being admitted as 
a Server in the Church a great privilege is being 
given to you. The Altar of a Church is the throne 
of God, and a centre of most powerful spiritual in- 
fluence. You are admitted to the sanctuary, or 
specially sacred part of the Church, immediately 
around the Altar, and it is part of your duty and 
privilege to be a channel of this spiritual influence, 
and to help to pour it out upon the people. 


Therefore you take upon yourself certain respon- 
sibilities, of which you should ever try to be mind- © 
ful. You must be scrupulously clean in your per- 
son. You must follow attentively the services, that 
your thoughts may be fixed upon high and holy things, 
and that you may be in readiness to carry out punc- 
tually and accurately whatever work is entrusted to 
you. Remember that your best, and only your best, 
must be offered to God. Therefore be punctual and 
regular in your attendance at Church, and never al- 
low yourself to perform any action carelessly and 
negligently, without proper thought. Your actions 
should be the outcome of thoughts of devotion and 
reverence, so that whatever you do shall be done 
beautifully, and as perfectly as may be. Try to 
enter into the spirit of service, remembering that 
“‘even the Son of Man came not to be ministered 
unto, but to minister.’’ So shall you find joy and 
peace in the service of God’s holy Church, and the 
hand of Christ be laid upon you in tender love and 
blessing. 


| 





ADMISSION OF A SERVER 371 


— 


The candidate kneels before the Priest. 


_ P. Wilt thou strive earnestly to practise these 
duties ? 


Candidate. I will. 


P. The Lord keep thee in all these things, well- 
beloved son, and strengthen thee in all goodness. R. 
Amen. 


The Priest says the following prayer with hands ea- 
tended towards. the candidate. 


O Lord Christ, Who art ever ready to receive and 
to strengthen the earnest aspirations of Thy children, 
look down in Thy love upon this Thy servant who 
desires to minister as a Server in Thy holy Church. 
Sanctify + him, O Lord, with Thy heavenly grace, 
that growing continually in virtue he may rightly 
practise the duties of his office, and so be found ac- 
ceptable in Thy sight, O Thou great King of Love 
and Wisdom, to Whom be glory for ever and ever. 
R. Amen. 


The Priest lays his hand upon the candidate’s 
head, raising it only to make the sign of the cross, and 
says: 

The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, + the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost, come down upon thee, that 
thou mayest rightly fulfil that which to-day thou 
hast undertaken. R. Amen. 





If it be thought well to admit in solemn manner per- 
sons appointed to other duties in the Church, or to bless 
any who engage in good works, the Priest should use 
the above form with necessary modifications, omitting 
the charge and promise or substituting another. 


BLESSINGS 


The following blessings are reserved to Bishops (with- 
the exceptions hereunder noted) : 


1. The blessing of the holy oils. 
2. The consecration of a Church, cemetery, or Altar- 


stone. (A Priest may bless. these for temporary use, 
but cannot consecrate them). 


3. The blessing of a chalice and paten, ciborium, 
monstrance, and large Church bell. (In case of neces- 
sity, a Priest may perform these blessings). 


It is desirable, but not essential, that a Bishop should 
bless Church vestments of silk and metal. 


Priests may perform all other blessings. 





THE BLESSING OF HOLY WATER 
THE EXORCISM AND BLESSING OF THE SALT 


The Priest prepares the salt as follows: 


I exorcize thee, creature of salt, by the living + 
God, by the holy + God, by the omnipotent + God, - 
that thou mayest be purified from all evil influence, 
in the Name of Him Who is Lord of Angels and of 
men, Who filleth the whole earth with His. majesty 
and glory. R. Amen. 


P. We pray Thee, O God, in Thy boundless loy- 
ingkindness to stretch forth the right hand of Thy pow- | 
er upon this creature of salt which we + bless and 
+ hallow in Thy holy Name. Grant that this salt 
may make for health of ming and body to all who ~ 
partake thereof, and that there may be banished from — 
the place where it is used every power of adversity | 
and every illusion or artifice of evil. Through Christ | 
our Lord. R. Amen. 





BLESSING OF HOLY WATER 373 
THE EXORCISM AND BLESSING OF THE bien 





* The Priest prepares the water as follows: 


I exorcize thee, creature of water, by the living 
+ God, by the holy + God, by the omnipotent + 
God, that thou mayest be purified from all evil influ- 
ence, in the Name of Him Who is Lord of Angels and 
of men, Who filleth the whole earth with His majesty 
and glory. R. Amen. 


P. O God, Who for the helping and safeguarding 
of men dost hallow the water set apart for the ser- 
vice of Thy holy Church, send forth Thy light and 
Thy power upon this element of water which we + 
bless and + hallow in Thy holy Name. Grant that 
whosoever uses this water in faithfulness of spirit 
may be strengthened in all goodness, and that every- 
thing sprinkled with it may be made holy and pure 
and guarded from all assaults of evil. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


The Priest casts the salt thrice into the water cross- 
wise, as he says the following: 


Let salt and water mingle together in the Name 
of the + Father, and of the + Son, and of the Holy 
| + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The following versicle and response are omitted if the 
ceremony be not public: 


P. The Lord be with you. 
C. And with thy spirit. 


P. O God,,the Giver of invincible strength, and 
| King of irresistible power, Whose splendour shines 
| throughout the whole of creation, we pray Thee to 
| look upon this Thy creature of salt and water, to 
pour down upon it the radiance of Thy + blessing 
| and to + hallow it with the dew of Thy lovingkind- 
| ness, that wherever it shall be sprinkled and Thy 
| holy Name shall be invoked in prayer, every noble 
aspiration may be strengthened, every good resolve 





374 BLESSING OF A CHURCH BELL 





made firm, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit 
vouchsafed to us who place our trust in Thee. Thou 
Who with the Son livest and reignest in the unity 
of the same Holy Spirit, God throughout all ages of 
ages. R. Amen. 


THE BLESSING OF A CHURCH BELL 


The bell to be blessed should be thoroughly cleansed 
beforehand, both within and without, and should be sus- 
pended so that its lip may be three or four feet above 
the ground. Before the service is begun, four small 
crosses should be marked with chalk upon the upper 
part of the sides of the bell, denoting the North, East, 
South and West points respectively. Also seven small 
crosses should be marked with chalk at equal distances 
upon the outside of the lip of the bell, to indicate to 
the Bishop where the oil is to be applied. An Acolyte 
or other assistant should precede the Bishop as he walks 
round the bell, and should wipe off with a damp cloth 
each of the chalk crosses just before the Bishop touches 
the spot with the Holy Oil. 


The Thymiama (which according to ancient custom 
is a mixture of ground myrrh, resin and incense) should 
be prepared beforehand, and a brazier with glowing 
embers or charcoal. If the ingredients of Thymiama 


are not procurable, a plentiful. supply of incense shall 
suffice. \ 


Holy water having been made in the usual way, the 
Bishop begins the Service with 


THE INVOCATION, 


In the Name of the Father, *h and of the Son, | 
and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 


The Bishop takes the aspergill and sprinkles the bell 
both outside and inside, saying: 


In the Name of God, I exorcize all influences of — 
evil, that they may be banished and driven forth | 
from this bell, which we are about to dedicate to His 


| 
{ 


| 


BLESSING OF A CHURCH BELL 375 


‘service. In the power of the + Father, and of the 
_+ Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 

The Bishop takes upon his thumb some of the Ow of 
the Sick, and therewith makes the sign of the cross four 
times upon the outside of the upper half of the bell, 
first wpon the north side, then (passing by the east) 
upon the south, then on the west side, and finally upon 
the east, saying: 
In the Name of the Most High, and invoking the 
aid of the holy Archangel Raphael, I anoint this bell 
for the healing of Christ’s faithful: followers, that 
whithersoever its sound may penetrate it may bear 
| help and strength both to soul and body, through Christ 
the Lord of heaven and earth. R. Amen. 


The Bishop intones the following prayer, moving round 
the bell and making the sign of the cross upon tt with 
the Oil of the Sick at the seven points indicated. ; 
| O Christ, Who art Thyself the great Exemplar of 
| all divine virtues, we pray Thee to pour down Thy 
blessing upon this bell, that its voice may arouse in 
the hearts of Thy loving children the discernment 
| clearly to perceive and the will humbly to copy Thy + 
| Strength, Thy + Wisdom, Thy + Lovingkind- 
‘ness, Thy + Beauty, Thy + Justice, Thy 
| + Devotion and Thy + Guiding Power, that so Thy 
| servants, being of Thy grace made perfect in Thee, 
| may finally attain the glory which Thou hast ordained 
| for them, Thou Who livest and reignest with the 
| Father and the Holy Spirit, One God throughout the 
|ages of ages. R. Amen. k 
| The Bishop then takes wpon his thumb the sacred 
| Chrism, and therewith anoints the inside of the lip of 
| the bell at the four cardinal points, saying: 
| To the glory of + God Most High, and of His Ser- 
|vants + Mary Queen of Heaven, Blessed -+ Michael 
the Archangel and the holy + St.*......... I sol- 


* Tere is inserted the name of the Patron Saint of 
the Church, or of the Saint to whom the bell is de- 
| dicated. 








376 BLESSING OF OBJECTS 


emnly dedicate this bell; may its sound peal forth. 
ever to the praise of God and the blessing of man; 


Making five large crosses in the air over the whole 
bell, he continues: 


May it be + hallowed and + consecrated to God’s : 
service for ever, in the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. BR. Amen. 


The Thymiama is then thrown upon the glowing char- 
coal in the brazier, and the latter is placed upon a stool 
under the bell. The Bishop intones: 


As the sweet savour fills this bell and rises up be- 
fore Thee, so pour Thou down, O Holy Spirit, the dew 
of Thy all-powerful blessing upon it and upon us Thy 
servants, Thou Who livest and reignest with the 
Father and Son, one God throughout the ages of ages. 
R. Amen, F 


tA hymn may be sung, while the Bishop cleanses his 
hands. When it is ended he pronounces this blessing: 

Unto God’s gracious love and protection I commit 
you; the Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make 
His Face to shine upon you and be gracious unto you; 
the Lord lift up the light of His Countenance up- 
on you, and give you His peace and yh blessing, now 
and for evermore. R. Amen, 





THE BLESSING OF OBJECTS IN 
GENERAL 


THE EXORCISM 


Priest. . In the Name of God, I exorcize all infiu- 
ences of evil that they may be banished and driven 
forth from this . . . , which we are about to dedi- 
cate to His service. In the power of the -+ Father, 
and of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. RB. 
Amen, 





+ Hymn 272 would be suitable. 


BLESSING OF A HOUSE 377 





The object may now be sprinkled with holy water 


_and censed. 


THE BLESSING 
P. Let us pray. 


O God, Who in the mystery of Thy boundless love 


_didst breathe forth Thine own divine life into this 





universe, and art Thyself the continual source of its 


existence, stretch forth, we pray Thee, the right hand 
of Thy power over this . .. , which has in divers 
ways been purified, and fill this creature with heav- 
enly + grace and + blessing; grant that whosoever 
shall use this . . . may be enlightened in heart and 
mind and serve Thee in all good works. Through 
Christ our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee 
in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God throughout all 
ages of ages. KR. Amen. 


THE BLESSING OF A HOUSE 


The priest, having vested, formally enters the house 


and says: 


Peace be to this house and to all that dwell therein. 


He then blesses incense, and, attended by one bearing 
the censer and another the vessel of holy water, he 


| sprinkles the various rooms with holy water. After 


which he says: 


O God, Who in Thy providence hast appointed a 
wondrous ministry of Angels, we pray Thee to send 
down Thy holy Angel to + bless and to + hallow 
this house, that they who dwell therein may abide in 
the love of Christ, and, continually increasing in the 
knowledge of Thy works, may serve before Thee in 
holiness and righteousness all their days. Through 
the same Christ our Lord. BR. Amen. 


378 BLESSING OF HOLY OILS 
THE BLESSING OF HOLY OILS 
ON MAUNDY THURSDAY 


The Bishop celebrates, in full pontifical robes. The 
oils and balsam for consecration are brought in at the 


offertory im solemn procession by the deacon and sub- 


deacon. 


After the hymn Adeste Fideles has been sung dur- 
ing the procession of the Blessed Sacrament, the Bishop 
is seated at a table placed before the Altar in plano. 
The Bishop exorcizges the oil and balsam as follows: 


THE EXORCISM 


In the Name of God, I exorcize all influences of 
evil, that they may be cast out from this oil and 
balsam which we are about to dedicate -to His ser- 
vice, in the power of the + Father, and of the + 
Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. BR. Amen. 


The vessels are now removed from the table on to 
the credence, except that containing the oil for the sick. 


THE BLESSING OF THE OIL FOR THE SICK 


The Bishop rises and blesses this oil as follows: 


In the Name of our Lord Christ, and invoking the 
assistance of the holy Archangel Raphael, I + conse- 
crate and + hallow this oil for the healing of the 
sick; may the blessing of the Great Physician rest 
thereupon, that it may give refreshment and peace 
alike to soul and body. R. Amen. 


The newly consecrated oil is carried in procession to 
the sacristy. ‘ 
THE BLESSING OF THE OIL oF CATECHUMENS 


The Bishop blesses this oil, as follows: 


In the Name of our Lord Christ, I + consecrate 
and + hallow this oil, that it may serve for the 
cleansing and safeguarding of those who receive the 


BLESSING OF HOLY OILS 379 


holy rite of Baptism or consecration to the Order 
of the Priesthood. R. Amen. 


The newly consecrated ot is carried in procession 
to the sacristy. 


THE BLESSING OF THE HOLY CHRISM 


The Bishop blesses the balsam and oil respectively 
as follows: 
The Blessing of the Balsam 


In the Name of our Lord Christ, I + consecrate 
and + hallow this balsam, that everything touched 
therewith may burn with His purity, before Whose 
splendour the Angels veil their faces. R. Amen. 


The Blessing of the Oil 


In the Name of our Lord Christ, I + consecrate 
and + hallow this oil now set apart for the making 
of holy chrism, that it may bestow upon those who 
receive it of the fullness of spiritual strength. R. 


Amen. 


The balsam and oil are now mixed, and the Bishop, 


extending both hands over the oil, continues: 


Let us pray. 


O Lord Christ, the Fountain of all goodness, Who 
dost pour down Thy gifts abundantly upon men, and 
for their strengthening dost hallow and set apart 
these earthly things as a channel of Thy marvellous 
power, send forth, we pray Thee, Thy + blessing up- 
on this holy chrism, that whatsoever persons or things 
shall be anointed therewith may receive of the full- 
ness of spiritual consecration. Let Thy heavenly 
blessing descend upon those who are signed by this 
chrism with the sign of Thy holy service, that, guard- 
ing well their spiritual heritage, they may shed 
around them the fragance of a godly life, O Thou 
Great Shepherd and Ruler of the souls of men, to 
Whom be honour and glory for evermore. R. Amen. 


380 BLESSING OF HOLY OILS 
a eee ee 


Lhe Bishop breathes three times in the form of a 
cross over the chrism. The Priests who are present 
breathe over it in turn in the same way, and it is then 
carried in procession to the sacristy: 


The Bishop proceeds with the Holy Eucharist. 
After the Ite Missa Est has been sung he exhorts the 
Priests faithfully to guard the chrism and holy oils, 
and not to presume to administer them otherwise than 
according to the usage of our Church. 


LAYING THE FOUNDATION 
SLONE OF A>CHURCH 





A temporary wooden cross should be erected on the 
spot where the Altar is intended to stand, and holy 
water should be freshly made just before the Service 
according to the usual formula. 


A plumb-line, a level, a mason’s square and trowel 
should be provided. 





When the procession reaches the site of the Altar, the 


_Bishop intones the invocation: 


In the Name of the Father, 44 and of the Son, 


| and of the Holy Ghost. BR. Amen. 





Taking the aspergill, which has been dipped in newly- 
blessed holy water, he sprinkles thrice the site of the 


Altar, saying: 


In the strength of the Lord do I repel all evil from 
this place which we are about to dedicate to His 
service, 

Turning westwards to face the foundations he 
sprinkles water thrice in their direction as he says: 
and from the foundations of this house wherein we 
shall worship Him. 

He resigns the aspergill, and turns back to the wooden 


cross, saying: 


| 





Let us pray. 
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy 


| Ghost, + accept, + hallow and + bless this place 


whereon Thy holy Altar shall henceforward stand. 
Do Thou, O Lord, with Thy*ever-abiding power, watch 
over this Thy future habitation, that it may become 
irradiated by the glory of Thy divine Love and 
sanctified by Thy perpetual Presence, through 
Christ our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with the 
Father and the Holy Spirit, one God throughout all 
ages of ages. R. Amen, 


382 FOUNDATION OF A CHURCH 


BLESSING AND LAYING OF THE FOUNDA- 
TION STONE. 


The procession moves to the foundation-stone, and the 
following versicles are sung: 


B. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 
C. Who hath made heaven and earth. 
B. Let us bless the Lord. 

C. Henceforth and for evermore. 


B. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and 
to the Holy Ghost. 


C. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever 
shall be: world without end. Amen. 


The Bishop takes the aspergill and sprinkles the stone 
with holy water, saying: 


B. Let us pray. 


O Christ our holy Lord, Son of the Living God, 
Who art the one Foundation and the chief Corner- 
stone of Thy Church, we pray Thee to + purify, + to 
accept and + to establish this stone to be placed in the 
foundations of Thine abiding place. May the incense 
of true worship, joyous and unafraid, ever arise with- 
in these walls; and to that end we "ask for strength 
to serve Thee better, for power to love Thee more, 
for greater light to give unto our brethren, O Thou 
great Ruler of the hearts of men, to Whom be praise 
for evermore. R. Amen. 


The Bishop resigns the aspergill, takes in hand the 
trowel, and spreads a layer of mortar where the stone is 
to be laid. The stone is lowered into its place, and 
turning to the subdeacon, he says: 


Is the stone plumb ? 





The subdeacon tries it with the plumb-line and re- 
plies: 


Right Reverend Father, the stone is plumb. 
Turning to the deacon, the Bishop says: 
Is the stone level ? 


FOUNDATION OF A CHURCH 383 


The deacon tries tt with the level, and replies: 
Right Reverend Father, the stone is level. 
The Bishop tests it with the square, and says: 
I declare this stone to be well and truly laid. 
He continues: 

Let us pray. 


Almighty God and Loving Father, without Whom 
nothing is strong, nothing is holy, look down in the 
might of Thy power upon this creature of stone, that 
it and this place, which we have dedicated to Thy 
service and consecrated to Thy work, may become 
radiant with the Light of Thy undying Fire. 


During the prayer which follows the Bishop anoints 
with chrism the cross carved on the face of the stone. 


Wherefore do we + bless and + hallow this stone 
as the foundation of Thy Church to the glory of God, 
to the perfecting of humanity, and in honour of *His 
glorious Martyr, the holy St.... In the name of 
the + Father, and of the + Son, and of the Holy + 
Ghost. R. Amen. 


The following canticle is now sung: 


Antiphon. 
Christ is our Foundation. 
And our chief Corner-stone. 


1. We are no more strangers and foreigners; but 
fellow-citizens with the saints and of the household 
of God; 

2. And are built upon the foundation of the apos- 
_tles and prophets: Jesus Christ Himself being the 
_chief Corner-stone; 


| 3. In Whom all the building fitly framed together; 
/groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord; 


| 
| 


|* This will vary according to the dedication of the 
Church, 








384 FOUNDATION OF A CHURCH 


4. In Whom ye also are builded together: for an 
habitation of God through the Spirit. 

5. Except the Lord build the house: their labour 
is but lost that build it. 


6. The foundation of God standeth sure, having 
this seal: let everyone that nameth the Name of — 
Christ depart from iniquity. 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to 
the Holy Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall 
be: world without end. Amen. 


Antiphon. 


Christ is our Foundation. 
And our chief Corner-stone. 
B. Let us pray. 


O Lord Christ, in Whose presence all desire dies 
save the desire to be like Thee, we pray Thee to send 
down into our hearts and minds a ray of Thy loving- 
kindness, that those who worship here may ever be 
gentle in speech, pure in thought and kind in ac- 
tion, that they may be bearers of thy love and joy 
to all their brethren, O Thou Who art the Master 
and Friend of all that lives. R. Amen. 


Turning to the people, the Bishop pronounces this 
benediction: 


The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, 
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and 
love of God, and of His Son, Christ our Lord; and 
the blessing of God Almighty, the + Father, the + 
Son, and the Holy + Ghost, be amongst you, and 
remain with you always. R. Amen. 


THE CONSECRATION OF A 
CHURCH 





Lhe clergy and acolytes enter the chancel singing a 
hymn, and group themselves around the Altar, which is 
uncovered and unadorned. 


THE INVOCATION 


Bishop. In the Name of the Father, yy and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. R. Amen. 

A short address appropriate to the occasion may be 
given by the Bishop, or by one of the clergy appointed 
‘or the purpose; or the homily which follows may be 
‘ead. 

Tt is the immemorial custom of holy Church to con- 
ecrate the building in which her services are per- 
anently to be held; and it is for this purpose that 
© are met together to-day. Our first step in this 

remony is to endeavour to purify the mental at- 
nosphere of the building by the use of holy water 

d of incense, so that worldly thought and infiu- 
ne may be banished: from it; and our thoughts dur- 
g our first procession should be devoted to that end. 
laving performed the ritual of purification, we call 
pon Almighty God to consecrate and to hallow all 
is various parts to the purposes in His service for 
hich they are destined, and to that end we anoint 
ith holy oil certain special centres of influence. In 
at second procession of consecration our minds 
ould be strongly fixed upon the idea that this 
ourch shall be not only a place free from selfish or 
prldly thought, but definitely an active centre of 

od and holy thought—not | merely free from evil, 
¢ actively good. When this great act of consecra- 

m has been duly performed, we at once begin our 

+ Service—the highest and holiest Service that 

know—the Holy Eucharist which Christ Himself 
fained. In the course of this celebration the third 
ocession will take place, and the sacred Host ‘will 


Be 


386 CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 


be borne round the Church as a crowning benedic- 
tion. During that time our hearts should be filled 
with deepest adoration to our Lord and with heartiest 
thankfulness for His wondrous love. Remember, 
then, these three keynotes of the different portions of 
the Service—first purification, secondly consecration, 
and thirdly adoration and thankfulness. | 


THE PURIFICATION 7 
B. Let us pray. 
All kneel. 


B. O God, omnipotent and omnipresent, Who dost 
deign especially to hallow and to dwell within those 
places set apart for Thy worship, we pray Thee sc 
to purify this temple by the influence of Thy Holy 
Spirit, that no evil thought may enter herein. Through 
Christ. our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee 
in the unity of the same Holy Spirit, one God 
throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


Al rise and the people are seated. 
The Purification of the Altar. 


The Bishop takes the aspergill, and, standing before 
the Altar, sprinkles it thrice with holy water; he goe: 
once round the Altar, sprinkling it meanwhile; then 
he faces the people and asperses them. 


B. Let us pray. 
The people kneel. 


B. Guide us, O Almighty Father, in all our doings 
and from Thy heavenly throne send down Thy holy 
Angel to be with Thy people who have met togethe) 
to serve and to worship Thee. Through Christ ow 
Lord. R. Amen. 


The people are seated. 


The Procession of Purification 


The procession forms, leaves the chancel by the cen 








CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 387 


tre, and encircles the church, the Bishop sprinkling the 
walls. Meantime a hymn is sung by all. 


The procession returns to the chancel. 


THE CONSECRATION 
B. Let us pray. 
All kneel. 


B. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy 
Ghost, + accept, + hallow and + bless this place to 
_the end whereunto we have separated it, even to be a 
sanctuary of the Most High, and a Church of the 
Living God. The Lord with His favour graciously 
regard our work, and so send down His spiritual bene- 
diction and grace, that it may be unto Him. the house 
of God, and unto His people worshipping therein the 
gate of heaven. R. Amen. 


The Consecration of the Altar 


The people are seated. The Bishop goes to the Altar, 
and with his thumb makes the sign of the cross with 
chrism upon the five crosses carved upon the Altar-stone 
(or upon the Altar itself if it be made of stone). He 
then anoints the cross of the tabernacle (or the Altar 
cross) with chrism, and says: 


O God, Whose wisdom mightily and sweetly order- 
eth all things, look down, we pray Thee, upon the 
handiwork of Thy servants, and fill this house with 
heavenly wisdom, that they who serve Thee here may 
be so filled with the Spirit of wisdom anda love that 
they may constantly labour to raise Thy people from 
the darkness of ignorance to the light of Thy holy 
truth. 


Wherefore do we + consecrate and + hallow this 


‘Altar to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 


manity, and in honour of *His glorious Martyr, the 





Bs *This will vary according to the dedication of the 
Chureh. 
N2 


388 CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 


I Ce es pe a Se eR ee 
holy St. . . . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. -! 


The Altar is dressed, the chalice and paten arranged 
upon it as usual, and the candles lighted. 


The Altar is censed by the Bishop, assisted by his 
ministers. 


The Procession of Consecration 


The procession is formed, and leaves the chancel by 
the centre. The following vérses are sung as the pro- 
cession moves to the cross in the south-east corner: 


Blessed city, heavenly Salem, 
Vision dear of peace and love, 

Who of living stones art builded 
In the height of heaven above, 

And, with Angels hosts encircled, 
As a bride doth earthward move; 


From celestial realms descending, 
Bridal glory round thee shed, 

Meet for Him Whose love espoused three, 
To thy Lord shalt thou be led; 

All thy streets, and all thy bulwarks 


Of pure gold are fashioned. 


The Bishop anoints this cross with chrism, and says: 


O Thou Whose beauty shineth through the whole 
universe, grant that as in this Thy shrine we seek 
to mirror the beauties of Thy celestial glory, so may 
we continually irradiate our lives with ie light of 
Thine indwelling Presence. 


Wherefore do we + consecrate and + allow this 
temple to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 
manity, and in honour of His glorious Martyr, the 
holy St. . . . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The third verse of the hymn is sung as the PR 
moves to the cross in the south-west corner: 








CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 389 


& Many a blow and biting sculpture 
Polished well those stones elect, 
In their places now compacted 
By the heavenly Architect, 
Who therewith hath willed for ever 
That His Palace should be decked. 


The Bishop anoints this cross: with chrism, and Says: 

O Thou great Master-Builder, Who hast laid the 
foundations of the universe in order and symmetry, 
grant that Thy people may so mould and polish’ the 
rude material of their natures, that they may be 
found just and accurate in Thy sight. 


. Wherefore do we + consecrate and + hallow this 
temple to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 
manity, and in honour of His glorious Martyr, the 
holy St. . . . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The fourth verse of the hymn is sung as the proces. 
sion moves to the cross in the west: 


Christ is made the sure Foundation, 
Christ the Head and Corner-stone, 
Chosen of the Lord, and precious, 
Binding all the Church in one, 
Holy Zion’s help for ever, 
And her confidence alone. 


The Bishop anoints this cross with chrism, and says: 


O God, the King of Angels, Ruler of all the hosts 

of heaven, we praise Theé for the help which these 
Thy radiant servants so joyously do render unto us; 
may we find strength to unfold within ourselves such 
courage, such wisdom, and such purity that we may 
be found worthy to be fellow-workers with them in 
Thy most glorious service. 
' Wherefore do we + consecrate and + hallow this 
temple to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 
manity, and in honour of His glorious Martyr, the 
lioly St. . . . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. BR. Amen. 


390 CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 


The fifth verse of the hymn is sung as the procession 
moves to the cross in the north-west corner: 


All that dedicated city, 
Dearly loved of God on high, 
In exultant jubilation 
Pours perpetual melody, 
God the One in Three adoring, 
In glad hymns eternally. 


The Bishop anoints this cross with chrism, and says: 

O Christ, the Lord of Love, we lay our hearts upon 
Thy shrine; in this Thy house of praise may the fer- 
vent adoration of Thy servants rise ever before Thee 
like incense, until the light of their love becomes one 
with Thine infinite Light. 


Wherefore do we + consecrate and + hallow this 
temple to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 
manity, and in honour of His glorious Martyr, the 
holy St. . . . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


The siath verse of the hymn is sung as the procession 
moves to the cross m the north-east corner: 


To this Temple, where we call Thee, 
Come, O Lord of hosts, to-day; 
With Thy wonted lovingkindness 
Hear Thy servants, as they pray: 
And Thy fullest benediction 
Shed within its walls alway. 


The Bishop anoints this cross with chrism and says: 

O God, Who meetest every man upon that path by 
which he draweth nigh unto Thee, grant us grace 
so to see Thee in the hearts of all men, that we may 
never fail in courtesy and understanding; and as 
Thou, O Lord, fulfillest Thyself in many ways, so 
may we rightly discern Thy purpose amidst the tu- 
mult of our earthly life. 


Wherefore do we -+ consecrate and + hallow this 
temple to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 


CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 391 


‘manity, and in honour of His glorious Martyr, the 
holy St... . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. BR. Amen 


The seventh verse of the hymn is sung as the proces- 
sion moves to the cross in the centre: 


Here vouchsafe to all Thy servants 
What they ask of Thee to gain, 
What they gain from Thee for ever 
With the Blessed to retain, 

And hereafter in Thy glory 
Evermore with Thee to reign. 


The Bishop anoints this cross with chrism, and says: 
O God, the Rock of Ages, the strength of all them 
that. put their trust in Thee, we pray Thee gracious- 
ly to regard our work and to fill this house with 
Thine almighty power, that they who worship here 
may be girded with strength for Thy holy service. 


Wherefore do we + consecrate and + hallow this 
temple to the glory of God, to the perfecting of hu- 
manity, and in honour of His glorious Martyr, the 
holy St. . . . In the Name of the + Father, and of 
the -+ Son, and of the Holy + Ghost. R. Amen. 


_ The eighth verse of the hymn is sung as the proces- 
pion enters the chancel: 


| Laud and honour to the Father, 
Laud and honour to the Son, 

| Laud and honour to the Spirit, 

| Ever Three, and ever One, 
Consubstantial, co-eternal, 

| While unending ages run. Amen. 


The Celebration begins as usual. 
THE COLLECT 


_O CHRIST our Royal Master, we pray Thee to ac- 
rept and ever to hallow this temple which we have 
iow dedicated to Thy holy Name; may the incense 
f praise and thanksgiving rise ever within its walls, 


| 
| 


392 CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 


and may the lives of those who worship here be truly 
in accordance with Thy most holy will, Who livest 
and reignest with the Father in the unity of the Holy 
Spirit, God throughout all ages of ages. R. Amen. 


Lhe Collect of the Day and the Collect for Peace fol- 
low here. 


THE EPISTLE 


The portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle 
is taken from the twenty-first chapter of the Revelation 
of St. John the Divine, beginning at the second verse. 


AND I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, 
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a 
bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great 
voice out of heaven saying: Behold, the tabernacle 
of God is with men, and He will dwell with them, 
and they shall be His people, and God Himself. shall 
be with them, and be their God. And God shall 
wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall 
be-no more death, neither Sorrow, nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more. pain: for the former things 
are passed away. And He that sat upon the throne 
said: Behold, I make all things new. 


Here endeth the Epistle. 
THE GOSPEL 


The holy Gospel is taken from the fourteenth chapter 
of that according to St. John, beginning at the sixth 
verse. 


JESUS said: I am the Way, the Truth and the 
Life; no man cometh unto the Father but by Me. 
He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father; for I 
am in the Father, and the Father in Me. I and My 
Father are one; as the Father hath loved Me, so have 
I loved you; and this is My commandment, that ye 
love one another, as I have loved you. When the 
Comforter is come, Whom I will send unto you from 
the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, Which pro- 
ceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me. And 





CONSECRATION OF A. ‘CHURCH 393 


ye also shall bear witness, because ye have beni with 
Me from the beginning. By this shall all men know 
that ye are My disciples, if ye have love one to an- 
other. 5 


At the end if the hymn ‘Ateate Fideles, ‘follosseale 
the consecration, the Host is placed within the mon- 
strance by the deacon. . 


THE PROCESSION OF THE BLESSED SACRAMENT 


The people kneel. 


The procession forms (the Bishop carrying the mon- 
strance, over which a canopy must be held) and moves 
through the body of the. church as. the. Litany is .sung 
alternately. If itt be convenient a Cantor appointed 
by the Bishop may sing the first, third, fifth, and other 
verses bearing odd numbers, the even verses being sung 
by the choir and the people. 


THE LITANY 


ile 


God the Father, seen of none, 

God the co-eternal Son, 

God the Spirit—Three in One, 
Hear us, Holy Trinity. 


Ze 


Son of God and Prince of Light, 
Throned in glory, robed in might, 
Morning star, serene and bright, 
Christ our Lord, we ‘hail’ Thee. 


3. 


Captain of the Hosts of Light, 

Overcoming sin’s dark blight, 

: Ever- -growing splendour - bright, 
Son of God, we hail Thee, 


394 


CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 


4, 
Thou, before Whose purging ray 
Mists of evil fade away; 
Orb of everlasting day, 
Son of God, we hail Thee. 


5. 


Thou, Whose wisdom all things planned, 
Held by Whose almighty Hand 
All things.in their order stand, 

We, Thy Church, adore Thes. 


6. 


Thou, Whose life and strength pervade 
Whatsoever Thou hast made, 
All-Preserver, strong to aid, 

We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


ie 


Thou Whose beauty, like a star 
Throbbing in the void afar, 
Only earth-born clouds can mar, 

We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


8. 


Thou, Whose universal might 
Saints acclaim with mystic rite, 
Clad in robes of dazzling light, 
Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


) 


Thou for Whom, in heavenly choir, 
Angel forms of living fire 
Wake the everlasting lyre, 
Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


10. 


Lord of Wisdom, from Whose lore 
Wisest men of earth may store 
Riches new for evermore, 

We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 





CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 395 


dee 


Still in bounty, Lord, bestow 
Blessings on Thy Church below, 
Till her measure overflow; 
King of Glory, hear us. 
12, 
King of Salem, Priest Divine, 
Thou, Whose love hath sealed us Thine 


Through Thy mystic Bread and Wine, 
We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


13. 


Priest and Victim, Whom of old 
Type and prophecy foretold, 
Thee Incarnate we behold; 4 
Son of God, we hail Thee. = 


14, 


Purged in vision through Thy grace, 
We by faith may see Thy face, 
Feel Thee near in every place, 
Christ our Lord, we hail Thee. 


15. 


Ruth divine that givest heed 

Unto every cry of need, 

Healing balm to hearts that bleed, 
Help us, Holy Master. 


16. 


Healer of the souls distressed, 
Happiness of all the blest, 
Peace of those who long for rest; 
We, Thy Church, adore Thee. 


7. 


Sweet Physician, skilled to heal 

Every pang the soul can feel, 

Thou that hearest each appeal; 
Help us, Holy Master. 


396 


CONSECRATION OF A CHURCH 


18. 
Lest by thought or action base, 
Ignorant, we slight Thy grace, 
Lest we hide from us Thy Face, 
Help us, Holy Master. 


Te) 
That our hearts may win release, 
That’ our hands from ill may cease, 
That our souls may know Thy peace, 
Help us, Holy Master. 


20. 
That, from selfish lusts made free, 
Each, at length, clear-eyed may see— 
See, and tread—the path to Thee, 
Help us, Holy Master. 


21. 
Till our pilgrimage complete, 
Rest shall come and comfort sweet, 
Friend of pilgrims, at Thy Feet, 
Son of God, we hail Thee. 


22. 


God the Father, seen of none, 
God the co-eternal: Son, 
God the Spirit—Three in One, 
We are Thine, O Trinity. 


After the procession returns to the chancel, the Hu- 
charistic service is continued to the. end. 





When tt is desirable to use a Church before the Bishop | 
can conveniently attend to consecrate it, the Priest should | 


Use 


the Collect of Purification (p. 386), sprinkling the 


Altar and Church with holy water, and then the Collect 


of Consecration (p. 387). The Altar-stone must have | 
been blessed by a Bishop. 





{ 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


These prayers may be used as additional collects or: at 
special Celebrations, as indicated. 


FOR THE CIVIL AUTHORITY. 


LET Thy blessing, O Lord, rest upon our King (or 
our Rulers) and all those set in authority under him, 
that by their endeavours all things may be ordered 
and settled upon the best and surest foundations, to 
our happiness and welfare and for the perfecting of 
Thy work amongst men, through Christ our Lord. 
R. Amen. 


FOR THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE 


ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, from Whom 
cometh every good and perfect gift, send down upon 
our Bishops and clergy, and upon the congregations 
committed to their charge, the healthful Spirit of 
Thy grace; and, that they may truly. please Thee, 
pour upon them the continual dew of Thy blessing, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


FOR A BISHOP 


To be used, for example, on the anniversary of his 
consecration by those of his diocese. 


O LORD CHRIST, the Shepherd and Ruler of the 
faithful, we pray for Thy servant N. our Bishop, 
that Thou wouldst bless him with strength, both 
podily and spiritual, that he may fitly bear the bur- 
den of his office, and with wisdom that he may edify 
the flock committed to his care. _ R. Amen. . 4 


Special Celebration: Epistle and Gospel as on Whit- 
sunday. we 


398 OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


FOR ALL DEGREES IN THE CHURCH 


ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, by Whose Spirit 
the whole body of the Church is made holy and gov- 
erned, graciously regard our prayer for all orders 
and degrees therein, that by the gift of Thy grace 
all in their several stations may faithfully serve — 
Thee, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


Special Celebration: Epistle and Gospel as at the 
ordination of a Priest. 


FOR THOSE WHO HAVE MINISTERED TO US IN 
SPIRITUAL THINGS 


ALMIGHTY God, Fountain of all goodness, we 
render thanks unto Thee for the blessings received 
through Thy servants (N.N.) who have ministered 
unto us in spiritual things, and we pray Thee to 
strengthen them in all goodness, that they may faith- 
fully serve before Thee all the days of their life, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


FOR A SYNOD 
Collect: As for Ash Wednesday. 


Special Celebration: Of the Holy Spirit: Collect, 
Epistle and Gospel as on Whitsunday, with the fore- 
going as the second Collect. 


AT MORNING 
Collects: As at Prime (p. 228.) 


AT EVENING 
Collects: As at Complin (p. 234). 


AN ACT OF UNION 


UNTO Thee, O Perfect One, the Lord and Lover 
of men, do we commend our life and hope. For 
Thou art the heavenly Bread, the Life of the whole 
world; Thou art in all places and endurest all things, | 
the Treasury of endless good and the Well of infinite 
compassion. R. Amen. ; 





“OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 399 


AN INVOCATION 


O MASTER of the great White Lodge, Lord of all 
the religions of the world, come down again to the earth 
that needs Thee, and help the nations that are long- 
ing for Thy Presence. Speak the word of peace 
which shall make the peoples to cease from their quar- 
relling; speak the word of brotherhood which shall 
make the warring classes and castes to know themselv- 
es aS one. Come in the might of Thy love, come in 
the splendour of Thy power, and save the world which 

_is longing for Thy coming, Thou Who art the Teach- 
.er alike of Angels and of men. R. Amen. 


FOR UNITY AMONG CHRISTIANS 


LORD CHRIST, Who dost dwell in the hearts of 
all men and hast commanded us to love one another, 
grant unto us grace seriously to lay to heart the un- 
happy divisions of those who confess their faith in 
Thee. Help us to lay aside all narrowness and pre- 
judice, all pride and hardness of heart, all that may 
hinder us from the understanding of our brethren, 
that we may live in the spirit of unity and concord, 
and through the diversity of our several gifts may 
glorify Thy holy Name. R. Amen. 





Special Celebration: Epistle as on the Fourth Sunday 
in Advent; Gospel as on the Fourth Sunday after Trin- 
ity. 

FOR THOSE OF OTHER RELIGIONS 


ALMIGHTY God, Who dost dwell in the hearts of 
all men and hast created them to be an image of 
Thine own eternity, we pray for Thy children of 
other faiths, that they, continually increasing in the 
knowledge of Thy truth, may perfect Thy work in 
their hearts, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


FOR THE SICK 


O GOD, Who art the strength of all them that put 
their trust in Thee, without Whom nothing is strong, 
nothing is holy, we commend to Thy fatherly good- 


400 OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


ness all who are (or Thy servant N. who is) in sick- 
ness and suffering, that so far as may be expedient 
for them, they may be restored to bodily health and 
serve Thee in virtue of the same, through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen, | 

Special Celebration: Epistle as in the words of the 
Apostle St. James in Holy Unction ; Gospel as on the 
Third Sunday after the Epiphany or the Fourth Sunday 
after Trinity. 


DURING COMMON SICKNESS 


ALMIGHTY God, who art the Strength of all them 
that put their trust in Thee, without Whom nothing 
is strong, nothing is holy, we commend to Thy father- 
ly goodness those who are afflicted with sickness in 
our midst, and we pray Thee to strengthen and bless 
those who minister to them, through Christ our Lord. 
R. Amen. 


IN TIME OF WAR. 


Special suffrages may be inserted in the Prayer of 
Consecration at the Eucharist, as directed by the Or- 
dinary. 


FOR THE DEAD 
Collect: As in the Burial Service (p. 295). 
FOR THE BEREAVED 
Collect: As in the Burial Service (p. 295), 
FOR A SCHOOL 


PROSPER with Thy blessing, O Lord, the work 
of this school, that they who here pursue the know- 


Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


O LORD CHRIST, Who hast taught us ‘that all our 
doings without love are nothing worth, grant unto 
us strength so to cast. aside selfishness and pride, that 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 401 








‘we may live together in the spirit of concord and 


_ brotherly love. R. Amen. 





FOR THOSE AT SEA. 
O CHRIST, at Whose command the raging waves 


were stilled, we pray for those who go down to the 


sea in ships, whose business is in the great waters. 
We would pour out upon them, O Lord, our courage 
and our strength, that under Thine almighty blessing 
our earnest thought may avail to the help and embold- 
enment of these our brethren, that by the guidance 
of Thy holy Angels they may safely reach the haven 
where they would be, Thou Who sittest above the 
waterfloods and remainest a King for ever. R. Amen. 


AT A HARVEST FESTIVAL 


WE praise Thee, O God, for all the blessings wh‘ch 
Thou dost continually bestow upon us, and in token 
of our gratitude we lay before Thee these harvest 
fruits, praying that we also may bring to good har- 
vest the seed which Thou hast planted in our hearts, 
through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


AT THE DEDICATION FESTIVAL. 
The anniversary of the Consecration of a Church 


| should always be observed as tts Dedication Festival. 


On that occasion the procession enters the Chancel by 
the short way, and the Asperges are recited as usual. 
The Priest uses the Collect on p. 387, beginning, O 
God, Whose Wisdom, but after the words the. light of 
Thy holy truth, he ends with, Through Christ our Lord. 


| Then the Procession of Consecration is repeated, and 


the hymn Blessed City sung as prescribed in the Ser- 
vice for the Consecration of a Church, the Priest recit- 
ing at each cross the appropriate prayer, but im each 
case omitting the sentence Wherefore do we consecrate, 
and substituting for it the ending Through Christ our 
Lord. The procession of the Holy Eucharist takes place 


| as in the Service for the Consecration of a Church, and 
| the Collect, Epistle and Gospel are those of that Ser- 


vice. 


402 OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


FOR ALL CONDITIONS OF MEN 


O GOD, the Creator and Preserver of all mankind, 
we pray Thee for all sorts and conditions of men; 
that Thou wouldst be pleased to. make Thy ways 
known unto them, Thy saving health unto all na- 
tions. More especially we pray for Thy holy Church — 
universal; that it may be so guided and governed by 
Thy good Spirit that all who profess and call them- 
selves Christians may be led into the way of truth, 
and hold the faith in unity of spirit, in the bond of 
peace, and in righteousness of life. Finally, we com- 
mend to Thy fatherly goodness all those who are in 
any ways afflicted or distressed, in mind, body or es- 
tate (especially those for whom our prayers are de- 
sired); that it may please Thee to comfort and re- 
lieve them, according to their several necessities; 
giving them ‘patience under their sufferings and a 
happy issue out of all their afflictions. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


A GENERAL THANKSGIVING , 


ALMIGHTY God, Father of Love, we Thy servants 
do give Thee most humble and hearty thanks for all 
Thy goodness and lovingkindness to us, and to all 
men: (particularly to those who desire now to offer 
up their praises and thanksgivings). We bless Thee 
for our creation, preservation, and all the blessings of 
this life; but, above all, for Thine inestimable love 
in the enlightening of the world by our Lord Jesus 
Christ, for the means of grace and: for the hope of 
glory. And, we pray Thee, give us that due sense of 
Thy lovingkindness, that our hearts may be un- — 
feignedly thankful, and that we may show forth Thy — 
praise, not only with our lips but in our lives, by | 
giving up ourselves to Thy service and by walking 
before Thee in holiness and righteousness all our — 
days; through Christ our Lord, to Whom with Thee 
and the Holy Ghost be all honour and glory. ieee 
out the ages of ages. R. Amen. ; 





| 





OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 403 





When it is desirable to offer the Holy Eucharist for 
some special devotion, in ‘addition to the special Cele- 
brations mentioned above and the intentions given in 
the Calendar, the following may be found suitable: 

Of the Holy Trinity: As on Trinity Sunday. 

Of the Holy Ghost: As on Whitsunday or any of the 
other six Sundays of special devotion to the Holy Spirit. 

Of the Most Holy Sacrament: As on Corpus Christi or 
Maundy Thursday. 

Of the Holy Angels: As on the Feast of St. Michael 
and All Angels or the Third Sunday after Trinity. 

Of our Lady: As on the Feasts in her honour, sub- 
stituting in the Collect the word ‘‘Day’’ for the phrase 
““the Festival of her ok 








SERMONS. 


When sermons are preached in connection with any of 
the services it is recommended that they should in all 
cases be preceded by the Invocation: In the Name of 
the Father +} and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
k. Amen, and shall be immediately followed by the fol- 
lowing ascription of glory to the Blessed Trinity: 


And now to God the Father, God the Son, and God 
the Holy Ghost, Three Persons in one God,.be ascribed, 
as is most justly due, all honour, might, majesty, power 
and dominion, henceforth and for evermore. R. Amen. 





CORRECTION. 

At bottom of p. 358, substitute for: He joins the 
consecrated hands and binds them with a linen strip, the 
following: He joins the consecrated hands, the right 
resting on the left, and they are placed in a linen cloth 
which is suspended from his neck. 

It should be understood that any member of the 
congregation who prefers to kneel all through a Low 
Celebration is permitted to do so. 


AMD. 





ADDITIONS, 





THE BLESSING OF A HOUSE. | 


After the Priest has formally entered the house and 
given the word of peace, he turns and draws a line with 
holy water before the door, and says: 


We pray Thee, O Lord, so to bless this door-way by 
Thy mighty power that those who enter through it may 
leave behind them all unworthy thought and feeling, 
that Thy children who dwell in this house may ever 
serve Thee in peace and holiness of life, through Christ 
our Lord. R. Amen. 


He then goes to all the other entrances to the house, 
and draws a line of holy water before each, repeating 
the same prayer. After this he proceeds to sprinkle 
and cense the rooms as prescribed. 


Let it be noted that the Eucharist of the Presanctified 
to be used on Good Friday and Holy Saturday shall 
commence with the Asperges in the Shorter Form, but 
omitting the words: 


He will send His holy Angel to build for us a spir- 
itual temple through which 





Page 174. The head is bowed at the words: the 
Lord our God is holy, in the seventh verse of the 
Canticle. 

Page 182. The words: P. Let us pray, should be 
inserted just before the last paragraph.. 

Page 217. If Complin follows Vespers, the Blessing 
in Vespers is omitted, but the Grace is said. 

Page 237. If Solemn Benediction follows Complin, 
the Blessing in Complin is omitted, but the Grace is 


said. 
School of Theology 


=e i) Oy ee re. 





os 
wets 














A i cons = 


Miff 








Liberal Oatholic church. Liturgy and 


BX 
4795 ‘The liturgy according to the use of tt 
LS church, prepared for the use of Englisi 
1921, gations. London. Los Angeles eto.) T! 
£192h, | 
403. th p 14%. 


Ss i - 1. Liberal Catholic church, | 
> ,  . % 
oe ee | are 


f 
Library of Congress \— BX4773.A3 





